PRACTICE IS THE KEY
In the last week we presented four cool ideas involving rigorous programming, well it is said that programming is a skill which is best acquired by practice. So keep on practicing, we are there with you in this journey of programming.
MAGIC SQUARE: HIT AND TRIAL 01
Amit, do you see there are nine squares here, yes sir. So you know how pseudoko works? Yes sir I know. Right! This is very similar to pseudoko but you don’t have to know pseudoko also I am just trying to see if you if I can motivate it through something to know already. Here are nine squares one two three four five six seven eight nine can you plug in the nine numbers one two three four five six seven eight and nine here so that each side adds up to the same number and each row and column everything whatever whichever way you add should add up to the same number. Ok you were saying that you want some programming challenge right? Yeah, yeah. I thought I would start giving you something like this. Go ahead try, so I have to choose the numbers from this set that’s right. No repetitions no repetitions allowed yes. The sum should be equal to one particular number right? Correct. The rows all the columns, correct. So this you would be surprised to know that this is this is more than two thousand years old. It was invented it was first noted in china and there is very interesting history you can look up on the internet but the best part is three cross three is very interesting as you increase the dimension it gets more interesting I will tell you something a lot more interesting once you solve this go ahead. Firstly do you think it is easy to solve? I think very easy. Very easy? Go ahead. Ok let me use this number yes two six correct so which would be seven eight fifteen adds up to fifteen so if you right some numbers here even that should add up to fifteen go ahead. Six I have used seven I have used two I have used may be you are yeah write something nine then eleven which means should be a four so what happens here two plus nine is eleven plus four is fifteen, two plus six is eight, eight plus seven is fifteen prefect! But then you should put some numbers here so that this adds to fifteen, this adds to fifteen not just that this adds to fifteen, this adds to fifteen oh! I forgot to tell you even the diagonal should add to fifteen ok go ahead. This is I used nine, four. Ok do one thing you go ahead and try I will take a break and come back sure sir, once you are done let me know, ok got it perfect. Hey amit you have done it, I have been watching you yes perfect, perfect, yes it’s a four plus three plus eight which is fifteen perfect. You can write fifteen properly here and then fifteen here nine plus five plus one fifteen, nine plus six is fifteen ok remove this and yeah fifteen here fifteen here eight plus one plus six, fifteen seven plus five plus three fifteen, our boy has done it, ok four plus nine plus two fifteen, fifteen look at this nine plus six fifteen, eight plus two plus five plus eight is fifteen perfect. I will ask you another question now this is just one way of doing it, there could be many ways to do this or I don’t know this may be the only way can you tell me if there are many ways of doing this, there can be multiples solution also yeah why not, oh my god it took me a lot of time to get this solution also ha ha ha so give me a chalk so what you can possibly do is you can try writing a piece of code as always right? Try to see whatever the total possible ways, how will you go about this? See I solve this in the brute force way trial and error you mean trial and error correct? I change some I put some number ok, check what’s the sum is going on right? With iteration I found this correct? For this I can write a code definitely and computer can do it in fraction of seconds, so I will write a code same brute force way. Perfect. But it will give me solutions, all the solutions, try doing it. Definitely. I will tell you something more two things
 
one is one dimension is lower by that I mean, let me look at two cross two board which should be something like this so can you tell me what would be the version of this problem here, for two cross two there were nine squares here so you considered one two three four five six seven eight nine. For four squares what would you do? One two three four I will considered. Can you quickly try if this is possible with one two three four I am going to give you just two minutes time. Go ahead something you will observe one two three four. Ok. Basically one should be there somewhere for sure definitely, ok. Diagonal should be same as this one three may be, do one thing let me write it in bold so you say one here and a three here some should be four this should also be four but you have two and four left this become six, you see you can try all possibilities you will observe and it is impossible to do it in two cross two, exactly while it is not possible to do it in two cross two, it is possible in three cross three and surprisingly for four cross four it’s so difficult that your computer is not enough, ordinary desktop is not enough to find a solution for four cross four guess why? Think about it, write a piece of code and may be you try explaining why it is not possible for four cross four. Sure yeah. Good job.
MAGIC SQUARE: HIT AND TRIAL 02
Hello everyone, today we are going to write a programme for ‘magic square’. In the video you saw amit was trying to solve magic square of size three cross three and was taking a lot of time because he was trying to solve his solve the magic square using brute force way. Which is possible for three cross three square matrix but not possible for let’s say five cross five and seven cross seven and even nine cross nine. So we will see that how we can write a programme so that we can solve any kind of magic square in an efficient way, or in an easy way. So we know that in three cross three magic square the sum is actually fifteen so let me revise the rules of magic squares. What you have to do, you have to create let say I give you a number ‘N’ you have to create a square of size ‘N’ cross ‘N’ such that some of each row is m is my magic number, some of each row should be ‘M’, sum of each column should be ‘M’ and even the diagonals, sum of the diagonals should be ‘M’. If it happens then you got the magic square, the question is, is it possible to create a magic square for any number N? Let see if I give ‘N’ is equal to three. So my matrix should become three cross three that is it should have exactly nine elements, ‘N’ sum of each row should be some ‘M’ the ‘M’ could be anything. But it should be unique I mean the sum of each row should be ‘M’, each column should be ‘M’ and the diagonal should be ‘M’ so we will see how we can do it, how we can create a programme in python so it can solve any kind of magic square. So will tell you that this, the size of I mean ‘N’ can take any number but it should be odd it should not be even and we will write a programme for that. Before that I will encourage you guys to look at the Wikipedia page of magic square it has all the entries regarding magic square and even history of magic square and even the algorithm to solve the magic square I am going to use this algorithm only. To solve to write a programme in python so before I go writing a programme let me tell you some facts ok see you can see here magic square size three and magic square of size five we know that what is the magic square of size three that is two seven six nine five one four three eight if you sum it then each row is becoming fifteen, six plus seven plus two is fifteen, nine plus five plus one is fifteen and even in diagonals sum both the diagonals sum is fifteen. Here is another magic square of size five you can find the sum of each row and each column it will be sixty five so before we go on writing a programme let me tell you some fact. Fact number one is that for any magic square, for any cross any magic square the magic number is always this which is ‘n’ into n square plus one whole divided by two so let say for three cross three magic square n becomes three so square of three is nine plus one is ten divide by two five into three is fifteen so magic numbers become fifteen and for magic square of size five that is ‘n’ is five, five square is twenty five, twenty six t which is fifty five oh sorry sixty five sorry. Yeah, so we are going to use this fact another thing is that whenever you see the, whenever you see the magic square we will find a pattern here, the pattern is that see the position of one, the position of one is always in the middle a row and last column ok whatever magic square you use, you can even see the magic square of size seven and also you will find in that a middle row. The one is always in the middle row and the last column. So we are going to based on that we are going to use this algorithm we are going to define the algorithm when we are going to use this algorithm to write a program so let’s see this. The
 
step number one is first we have to determine the location of one, so will fix one after that will go on go on to other numbers and will fix their positions and by this will try fitting our numbers and will get our magic square. So first is we know the as I told you in any magic square one is located at the position n by two comma n minus one for any general n cross n matrix square matrix n by two will give me the position of row ok, so for example for three n by two becomes one I am taking the integer number so zero one first row is zero and second row is one third row is two so one is this position and n minus one is the column position which is two so second column so am I position of one is this which is first row and second column. For magic square of size five becomes five by two which is two second row zero first zero one two second row and the last column that is n minus one which is four fourth column we are assuming that always we always assume here that the matrix starts with zero cross zero, zero comma zero sorry. Ok now after determining the position of one will see where, where two lies now see here the position of two here also there is a pattern for two also you can see two is here when one is here again the two is here so let’s say the position of I take this in the position of one which is n by two comma n minus one as ‘p’ comma ‘q’ lets say the position of one is ‘p’ comma ‘q’ this is ‘p’ comma ‘q’ this is p this is q then next number which is two is located at p minus one comma q plus one oh see this one is at two comma four now if you take p minus one which is two minus one is one and q plus one ‘q’ is here four, four plus one becomes five now five is not there what is this mean? So let me tell you the second line anytime if the calculated row becomes minus one then make it n minus one and if column position becomes n then make it zero. Here, column position is becoming ‘n’ which is five, five is n so you have to make it zero so it will come zero. So now see my location is p minus one which was two oh sorry one and ‘q’ plus one which was zero so two zero oh one zero I am sorry so new location is one zero so I will put my two here so like this I will do for calculate for other number also now after this I will calculate for three again using the same thing now the third step is not the step the third fact is if the calculated position always contains the number suppose calculated position I mean already contains a number then decrement the column position by two and increment the row position by one. We will see this how it happens. Now the last fact is if any time the row position becomes minus one and column position becomes n switch it to zero comma n minus two. So I am going to use these three conditions or facts or algorithm say it is not algorithm because I have denitrify the steps these are not steps these are facts only so I am going to use these facts as a condition to write my programme and based on this I will create my magic square so in next video we will see how you can use these steps to create magic square.
MAGIC SQUARE: HIT AND TRIAL 03
So in last video, we saw the conditions which we can follow to find our magic square of any size ‘n’, precisely ‘n’ should be odd. Let me help you with an example to solve, to use these steps to find the magic square of size for us three cross three matrix. Now here I have a three, I created a three cross three matrix here ‘x’ represents the elements which I will write as I will follow the algorithm and these are the locations of these elements. For example the matrix starts with zero comma zero which is the location of this element is zero comma zero because this is the first row which is zero is been told you the always the first row and first column will be zero comma zero please follow this convention, location of this element is zero comma one, location of this element is zero comma two similarly location of this element is one comma zero because this is the first row location of this element is one comma one, location of this element in one comma two, location of this element is two comma zero, location of this element is two comma one and location of this element is two comma two. Now let me go to the condition the first step was to find the location of one we know that one is already always located at the middle row and last column so we find that. See in this example the size of the value of ‘n’ is three because this is the three comma three matrix and we want to create the magic square of size three cross three. So yeah so let’s see the first step which is determining the position of one, since ‘n’ is three so the location of one is ‘n’ by two comma ‘n minus one’ which is three by two comma three minus one, three by two becomes one integer division and three minus one becomes two. So position of one is one comma two, so I will put one here awesome, now the next step is to determine the position of two, so for that what we have to do, will take the last determined location, last determined location is one comma two is ‘p’ comma ‘q which becomes ‘p’ this becomes ‘q’ and will find the next position, position of next element as p minus one comma ‘q plus one’ so position of two becomes ‘p minus one’ which is one minus one and q plus one which is two plus one so it becomes zero comma three ok. Now any time, any time is calculated column positions columns position becomes n see here the column position is becoming n, n is three. So make it zero so I will make it, making it zero it becomes zero comma zero. So I will put two at zero comma zero, two I will put, I will put zero comma zero ok great so now the next element is three I have to determine the position of three so I will take last calculated position p comma q this is p this is q and again I will follow the same thing. So the position of three becomes ‘p minus one’ and ‘q plus on’, ‘p minus one’ is zero minus one and ‘q plus one’ is zero plus one it becomes, what does it become? You should write it here, it becomes minus one comma one again I will say the same thing any time the calculated row position becomes minus one here row position becomes minus one make it ‘n minus one’ so ‘n minus one’ means three minus one, so three minus one is two this is as it is two comma one so my position of three is two comma one, let me see where is two comma one, two comma one is here so here I will write three great again position of four same algorithm two one as pq two minus one is one, one plus one is two this I simple one comma two, one comma two I will now see at one comma two one is already present so what we have to do? If the calculated position already contains the number then decrement the column by two and increment the row by one so what I will
 
do, decrement the column, column position was two determine position was two, so decrement the column position by two which becomes two minus two is zero and increment the row by one, one plus one becomes two at two comma zero I will put four great, position of five becomes this is pq two minus one, zero comma one so one comma one I will put five here, position of six one minus one, one plus one two zero comma two so I write zero comma two is six, position of seven becomes what is zero minus one into plus one, now this is little bit tricky. See whenever we saw here see here that zero minus one is becoming minus one will see this condition that any time if calculated row position become minus one then make it n minus one we have to check here both the condition is if position of row become is becoming minus one and the column is becoming n which is three here then you have to follow this condition that is the fourth one, if anytime row position is becoming minus one and, and is very important here column becomes n which is to zero comma n minus two so I will make it to zero comma n minus two three minus two is one so zero comma, at zero comma one I will put seven ok. now next is eight, eight is that so zero comma one is my pq so zero minus one and one plus one so it becomes minus one and two so I will use this condition only that is row is becoming minus one and I will make it n minus one, n minus one is three minus one which is two so it becomes two comma two, so two comma two I will put, eight and the last is nine so which two comma two is my pq so two minus one becomes one and two plus one becomes three so two minus one I don’t have any problem with this the row, the column is becoming three so I will wrap it up so it becomes three becomes zero becomes one comma zero so I will get one comma zero. As you see this was the exactly these were the elements of magic square, you can see here I got the magic square you can find the diagonal some of diagonal and row and column it is exactly fifty nine, eight plus one plus six is fifteen, nine plus one plus five is fifteen. So this is the algorithm we are going to use pretty simple. Giving me this algorithm I can definitely say that you can write a programme, you can use the steps and I will encourage you guys to write a programme by your own and you can ask any question in discussion form, in the next video I will try to code this, write a programme using this algorithm and we will create magic square of this size. If you think you can find another pattern and you can write so another algorithm please, please, please post it on discussion form, it will be very good for us and for other students also. Thank you.
MAGIC SQUARE: HIT AND TRIAL 04
Ok, now we are going to write a programme for matrix square, so what the programme should do? Should take an input n and is the number of elements in magic square since it is a square matrix so the number of elements will become n cross n it will take n and generates the magic square. Now in last video we saw the condition which you can use, we saw the algorithm which we can use to create the magic square, so will use that algorithm to write a programme. So let’s start. As I told you it is better to write a whatever programme you are creating whatever logic you are creating in a function so that you can use that function many time rather than just writing in python file its better if you create a function so I will create a function let’s def magic square ok, it will take an argument that the numbers of rows or number of columns which is same for a square matrix in magic square. Ok in python I need to define the matrix because the element should be present in the matrix then I can change the elements accordingly so I will define a matrix of size n cross n with initially initial all the elements will be zero all zero so matrix will contain all zero and then as we go as we go down to the algorithm step by step will change the elements from to one from zero to other elements since let’s see if there is a three cross three square matrix so elements will be from one to nine. For other it could be different but zero will never come because it will always start from one, so ok let me define the matrix magic square lets see. so for that I need two loops I will write here for I in range three it means it will go from zero to two, zero one two then for j in range again three ok, before that let me define an define a variable named magic square magic square so it is a list I am using it as a matrix inside this first loop I will define a simple list and which I am not keeping anything there which means whenever this loop is, whenever I go inside this loop it will create a new variable, a new list and as soon as this loop gets over it will again go to this loop go inside this and again create a new list l so what I will do inside this j loop ok I will enter the element in l so I will write l dot append, append is to enter the elements in the list so I will append zero so what will happen? See in the first run when the I is zero ok so I become zero so this n is created after this will go inside this loop j loop here j is again becoming zero so for this I am going l dot append zero so first time when j is zero l has element l will contain l will contain zero then it will go back to j, j becomes one j in range only so it will again append zero so l will contain zero comma zero. Again it will go back to loop this j becomes two, two is within the range so again l dot append will run so it will become zero so l will contain zero comma zero comma zero next time j becomes three, three is not in range because three is out of index of range three so this loop will break so it will go to i, now I becomes one and I am not doing anything it so as soon as this before ending the I loop I have to append this l which l I got that is zero comma zero comma zero in this magic square so what I will do after this loop but inside the I loop I will magic square dot append l so what it will do as soon as the j loop gets over the l whatever value I have in l after the j loop I will apply it in the magic square. It will become a first loop similarly when the second run of ith loop again I will create a second row of using the j loop and I will append it in here magic square ok so the magic square will contain a contain the matrix containing zero only zero so I can print this so in order to print this I will just copy this ok you can simply
 
comment this using the yeah you can simply comment this. So what I will do I will print here print magic square I comma j ok let me delete this ok lets run this. So nothing is there because I have to call this function so magic square n is what in range I have to put n because we are making it generalise programme not for three so for n I will put three here and it is showing like this zero, zero, zero, zero, zero, zero, zero, zero and I want it to be in a matrix only so for that in python three what you can do, you can write comma end is equal to like this it will join the I mean print statement always prints one and then by default it keeps new line character till the end so I will put this it will create, it will print the whole everything I this loop in one line so in this I will write magic square three ok so what I am getting here I am getting everything so I just write a print statement here print and I am not print anything great, so what’s this print statement does it print everything in one line that’s why I am getting everything in one line but after this loop if I just print nothing, nothing means new line character is always there so after this loop after the first loop it will print a new line character and next I will get the next row I mean in next print I will get the next row so this is how so our matrix is good everything is fine perfect I am getting my three cross three matrix now this is the way this is the conventional way of creating the matrix python is a very cool way of creating such things, the best thing about python is that you can write loop inside a list also suppose I can write magic is equal to this is the matrix I want to create at inside this I will write the loop for I in range three it means for I in range three and I will put here zero it means it means for I in range three put zero in this list so it will create, it will create a list of zero three zeros in a list because I in range put three times I have to put zero in this list now same thing I will use like this for I in range put zero and put this list three times, I want this list three times, three times like this so that I can get my magic square for that put this list for j in range three it means that for j in range three put this list inside this list awesome I got my magic square. Great so you can try this I have already written this loop, these loop for creating my simple square matrix of zero elements.
MAGIC SQUARE: HIT AND TRIAL 05
Ok, the first step was to find the location of one so we know that the location of one is always the middle row and the last column so we I will fix it let me put I is equal to n by two and j is equal to n minus one, you can guess what these are these are the local variable and j are not have been defined but as soon as they use this warnings will go away so I will not care much of this ok I will create, I will create a variable name num which I will initialise to n cross n so that I can use it again, I may not have to calculate it every time I will take count variable initialise to one, count variable is my elements so as soon as I put elements I will increment the count variable so that I can put the next element so first I have to put one then as soon as I put one I will increment the count to two so that I can count again some location ok now I need to follow some condition multiple times, multiple times means what? Until and unless I do not exhaust all the elements, all the possibilities of this matrix which for example three cross three it is nine, it means that I have to check the condition for nine times exactly nine times so I will write a while, while this count is less than equal to num so what this is mean? Until and unless I have put all the all my elements into their location my count will not go to for example three cross three the count is count becomes more than nine that is ten I have to stop here because I have put all my elements to their respectively locations so I don’t have to follow the conditions again so that’s what this is the condition which I am going to follow the while loop then let see this as I told you the algorithm that this whenever I find the position, the position of one is fixed ok whenever I find a position I have to check two things first is if row is exceeding row is becoming minus then I have to make it zero or n minus one sorry this column is becoming n then I have to make it zero but before that the important thing is if row is becoming minus one and, and, and this is or there is a difference between and, and or, and column becomes n then you have to switch it to zero comma n minus two, this is very important because this is the and condition so it should come first so I will write this so I will write if I becomes minus one which is i’s and j becomes n then what is this? I have to follow you write it here condition three condition four yeah ok what is the condition? I have to make j is equal to n minus two, column is becoming n minus two and row is becoming n minus one so j comes n minus two yeah and row becomes zero sorry so I becomes zero this is correct ok else if and condition is not followed it means either of, either this is happening or this is happening let see if j is becoming n column is exceeding so column value is exceeding when this is happening what what you have to do is if column is if column position becomes n then make it zero ok so I will make j equal to zero so or so this is a or, or condition so I don’t have to write else here because I have to check both things, for any one of this if after checking this I will check this also not only this or this. I become less than zero then I is equal to n minus one which is this condition is what row is becoming minus one great, now these conditions are over, now what else. One more condition is there if I calculate the location but that location already contains some element then I have to something for that I have to check if my magic square I don’t know why I find even though writing magic square ok if magic square location which is I comma j is not equal to zero if it is something else then zero it means it already here something ok then I have to put j is equal to let me check the condition
 
what was it? If the calculated position already contains a number then decrement the column by two and increment the row nu minus one, so will decrement the column by two and j minus two and I is equal to I plus one and after this it might happen that after calculating after doing this the sum of these conditions might follow that either this is happening that is the row is exceeding and column is also row is going to minus one and column is exceeding only column is exceeding only row is exceeding so I have to check that for that I have to go to the go back to the loop now see this in all this condition I did nothing with the column values, column values not incremented so if anything is happening with this, I will check the condition but count will, will not increase so I can do this as many times I as I can so, so for that I need to check this conditions again so for that I will just write continue what does this mean that? After doing this it will skip all the rest of these things which is inside the loop and go back to the while loop and do the things again since the count value is not incremented yet so it means that I am doing the doing everything again without any condition again great so this is done I have checked it else this means what if it doesn’t contain any value it means that it is empty it means it contain zero I can put I can safely put my element for which I am calculating the position for that I will write magic square is equal to count value because count is my value and I will put count plus one which means count is equal to count plus one increment the count value which is my next element this is done everything is done now whenever I put an element to its location I have to switch to the second element and I have to follow the p q wala thing so for now whatever location, whatever location I have calculated for this element and take it as p and q and I will follow the p minus one and q minus one q plus one so p minus one means I become I minus one and j becomes j plus one this is it so this was what? Write it here condition one great we are done with this, this is over. Print the elements; do you know how to print the elements? I will copy this just wait one second awesome this is done I will call this function here, function is magic square I will say three for three let me run this ok I am getting an error here, type error list in this is must be an integers or slices not so where it is getting I j ok let see this here I have written I is equal to n by two lets what did I put as n see three by two it is one point five and, and what I am doing using this as indices of my matrix so one point five doesn’t mean anything in list it should be exactly integer for that you can use the integer decision that is three two division sign and two equals of course exactly one, so I will put two division signs here that’s it let see this tada let me print one more thing here so that I get the value print the sum of each row slash column slash diagonal is what is it? Put plus here STR of n cross sorry n into I need to take this square for square my operator is two stars into n plus one and bracket. Try here m is equal to three into three two one m ok I think you understood what is taken, c I didn’t put any multiplication sign here which is a sin, listen to this sum of oh my god sorry I should run now please god awesome, I am getting magic square and my sum let me try this for seven let’s see this awesome this is exactly the magic square you can check it and the sum is one seventy five let me try this for five one is great so this works, so this was the magic square programme you can try some other algorithm if you find some pattern this is some basic algorithm which I found on Wikipedia you can check it please make sure whenever you find any difficulty let like sometimes it happen you writing a code but you miss something then dot understand what wrong you are done this is very simple code on few lines sixty one sixty and some add-ons so finding mistake here is not very difficult but if you have a thousand

lines of code it will be mess it will be very difficult to find any bugged there, its better you always you can always search for the problems for example this I can search and I can try this here so it will re direct me to the stack overflow, stack overflow is the best website to insist to your problem most of your problem will be ensured here and even if some of the problems are not insured you can ask it and easily get insured here in very less time works like a charm so please make use of it and we are done with the magic square, you can do this programme in many ways this is one of the way so please try finding other way also or you can even use some other parading for example you can use recursion to make this to create this programme. So thank you every one please posts your queries and other things on discussion form.
LET’S PROGRAM AND PLAY
Mario, angry birds, candy crush, I am sure most of you have played these games. Well now it’s time to develop a new game through programming.
DOBBLE GAME-SPOT THE SIMILARITY 01
Do you know this game? What game is this? Dobble dobble! Dobble. Do you know how to play this? Yes. Then show me, here is the card, here is the another card can you tell me what is common between this and this? What is common? Tell me. Horse horse, horse horse very good. Very good, now what is common here and here? Can you show me what is common? Ok take your time, ok is only one object common, this and this what is that called? Candles candles that’s right. so the pint is there is only one symbol common in these two cards one and only one and the game is all about one person asking the other person show me what is common between this card and this card ok? So let us play this further. Tatswit you are recording! Yes I am recording yes video is getting recorded so you better be good. Tell me what is common here and here? Ohhh click click click what is common? Ok there is one pink here which is also here what is that? Now you should find it, I am not give you any hints ok ok you be silent ok I am silent. Ok see something is common here what is that? Something is flies! I don’t know what is here! This and this, what is that called? Dragon! A dragon that’s right, very good so as you can see there is precisely one symbol common between these two cards, there are eight symbols here and eight symbols here and precisely one symbol is common and that happens to be a flying dragon so the game is all about we figuring out what is that common object given in any two objects, as you can see its very difficult to figure out what is common here just like that. There are eight objects here eight objects here you see, you should compare every eight objects in this card with every eight objects in this card that happens to be eight into eight sixty four which is of huge space for us to compare and only one of them is the right answer. Say hi fi say hi fi hi fi give me a hi fi ahh.
DOBBLE GAME-SPOT THE SIMILARITY 02
I think the rules of the game is very clear to you all of you. Simply look at these two cards they have eight symbols each. This is one game which I am very curious to know why our mind cannot spot the exact commonality between two cards, it feels like the moment you spot it you feel how is that all but it takes the long time to spot it. The best part about the game is the way it is being made you see the cards are such that. Pick any two cards there are roughly fifty cards in this deck. Any two cards that you pick will have precisely one symbol in common you not have two symbols in common it is not so happen that no symbols are common exactly one symbol is common and it’s for you to find out what’s that is? So the rule of the game is very clear. Two people are sitting and one person flashes two cards the other person should spot the common object, so in this case you see this is the common object. Some other two cards you see this is the common object. This is the common object and so on
DOBBLE GAME-SPOT THE SIMILARITY 03
Well this game appears to be simple but actually it is not, wanna play? Let us try to stimulate the pythonic version of this game. So first of all let me give you a brief introduction of what dobble game is all about. As you know we have a set of cards here each card has some symbols on it, each card has definite number of symbols on it in fact if we pick any two cards we will find the definite number of symbols on it and if you pick any two cards from a lot they will have only one and one symbol in common. You can clearly observe this here that each pair of card will have only one and one symbol in common. So this is what dobble game is all about as we have discussed so how can we realise this through programming? In fact this is much easier in python so will have two list here list one and list two each list will have definite number of symbols and symbols are represented by alphabets so if we have seven alphabets in list one you must have seven alphabets in list two also so we have definite number of symbols and you also need to take care of this fact in mind that each pair of list should have only one and one alphabet in common this is something that we need to check in programming and see how can we play this. For example I have two list here list one and list two, list one comprises of the symbols or alphabets AGTFC and list two comprises of the alphabet TJYPOL so as you can see here only one and one alphabet is common and that is T and they have definite number of alphabets in the list, we have six alphabets in list one as well as six alphabets in list two. This is something that we need to do through python or programming so let us start with our programming screen cast.
DOBBLE GAME-SPOT THE SIMILARITY 04
Hey, every one as we have discussed we need to have two list here, list one and list two each list will comprise of definite number of symbols and there should be only one and only one symbol in common between these two list as we discussed we will be taking alphabets as symbols here so I will be using a particular string here that is called string dot ascii underscore letters since this is from string library we will be importing string here. Let me print it and show you as you can see here we have lower case and upper case letters in this particular string we have A to Z from we have A to Z in lower case and A to Z in upper case, let me zoom it so that you can see it properly. You see here we have A to Z in lower case letters and A to Z in upper case letters I will be using this particular string for symbols. I will have a symbol list here, since this is the string I just convert this particular string to list symbols is equal to list, string dot ascii underscore letters so we have our symbols here now we have to generate two more lists I will call them card one and card two. I will initialise it also so we will be having only five symbols in each card because I have initialised the list to five elements to five zeros so first of all I need to find the positions of the same symbol in card one as well as in card two, I will have two variables here first is pos one that will be the same position in card one and next one will be pos two that will be the same symbol position in card two so I will have random dot randint it will be from zero to five it will generate random numbers zero one two three same way we can have pos two that will be the same symbol position in card two. So will have random dot randint from zero to five ok I will write here also pos one and pos two are the same symbols position in card one and card two respectively. So we are done with the positions ok so next what will be doing here is will be having a character named same symbol and I will just randomly choose it from our list that is symbols. You need to if you need to choose from the list you can use random dot choice as we are using random we should import random here too. So we are don’t with the cards we are done with the same symbol, now we need to append the same symbol in card one as well as in card two ok. so I will have here if pos one is equal to pos two then card two pos one is card two pos two or pos one whatever you want to take you can take since they are equal, will be equal to same symbol same with card one pos one is equal to same symbol if they are not equal then we need to take care of some things here so concentrate we will have card one pos one as same symbol as you discussed earlier and in card two at pos two we will save same symbol but at position one in card two we will have another symbol we will have card one position two will have another symbol so we need to again randomly choose it from random list symbol, random dot choice symbols and similarly for card two at position one will have random dot choice symbols aren’t we doing something wrong here because if we are choosing from the same list even card one and card two may have the same symbol so we should remove the same symbol from the list symbols so I just simply write symbols dot remove same symbols. Please note the fact why I am doing this here because we don’t want same symbol to repeat in card one and card two so what we will do here we will just remove the same symbol from the list symbols. Even, even we don’t want repetitions in the same card; we don’t want the same symbols to repeat in similar in same card. So we also need to
 
remove the other symbols that we are choosing for card one and card two so I will just write here symbols dot remove card one pos two and here also symbols dot remove card, card two pos one. So we are done with position one and position two and we are also done with this particular symbols that will be there in card one and card two at pos one and pos two. So what about the remaining position apart from the pos one and pos two, will also be appending some symbols here which are not similar obviously so let us do that. For that I will have a while loop here I will initialise a variable I while I is less than five ok we need to take care of this fact in mind that position one and position two shouldn’t be here so while I is not equal to pos one and I is not equal to pos two only then this while loop will execute. So I will have two more characters here alphabet one and alphabet two so I will write random dot choice from symbols as and always we should also remove this alphabets from symbols so I will remove this alphabet. Symbols dot remove alphabet one and for card two will have alphabet two.. That is random dot choice, random dot choice symbols symbols dot remove alphabet two. So we are done with generating alphabet one as well as alphabet two so next we need to append this in card one and card two in card one the ith position append alphabet one in card two it ith position append alphabet two, so we are also done with the remaining position also implement this i, so we are done with pos one and pos two the same symbol as well as the remaining positions. Let me check whether the cards that are desired are the desired cards are showing up or not. So we will just print card one and card two so is to check whether our code is working fine or not. Ok let me check, what is common here is S S ok let me check again there is some error list assignment index out of range card one pos one so let me check that. We need to print pos one and pos two here so as to check whether it is taking the correct pos. It’s Four three it is correct its one, one is correct, four three is correct, three one is correct yes we have an error here it is taking one and five also so we will just generate from zero to four, now it’s fine so please note the fact that if we will generate random numbers, random integers from zero to five then it can also generate five. For example it can generate from zero to five zero one two three four or five so it will just generate it from zero to five, zero to four because in list we have assignments from zero till four ok so we will generate the random integers from zero to four will write the ranger as zero comma four please note this fact here. So we are done with the cards now since the player is playing this game we should also know we should also let him know that whether he has won or not so I will just write will just input a particular symbol here so ch input ask the user to spot the similar symbol ok if ch is equal to is equal to same symbol then you just write print right else print wrong. So let us try to run this, so we have to spot the similar symbol it is m here yes again run this we have to spot the similar symbol and that is r, again run similar symbol here is it is difficult to find it is though ok so this is how we can play dobble game through python and I may have been wrong before but please note the fact in mind that if we generate random integers from a particular range for example if we write from zero to five then it can also generate five. It can also generate zero that means it can generate zero one two three four five, the both ends are inclusive so we will just write zero four because we need to have list assignments from zero to four ok please note this fact in mind because we were wrong at this and other wise the code is working fine, I hope you enjoyed this programming screen cast happy learning.
WHAT IS YOUR DATE OF BIRTH?
Well guys you know I share my birthday with sachin tendulkar I feel so lucky I think it’s very rare for two people to share the same birth date is that so? Let us find out.
BIRTHDAY PARADOX-FIND YOUR TWIN 01
Let me take the list of my friends, eight of my friends namely, rishi aeyathi rishi anamika akruthi vidya amit and simran. I go to all these eight people and ask them what is your day of birth by day I mean Monday or Tuesday or Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday right? They all will give me their respective answers hoping that they know their day of birth, all of us know in fact. They all will give their answers but one thing is for sure that two people here would be born on the same day when I ask them I noticed that this was the answer and you see that there are two people born on the same day as you can see. This is like stating the obvious you take eight people and you ask them what is your day of birth, what is your day of birth a person can be born in one of these seven days, when you take eight people definitely for sure you will find two people with the same day of birth. Now let me some other experiment let me go on the roads and ask people randomly their dd mm by this I mean their day of birth and month of birth, dd stroke mm, let me ask a few people and see if I find two people who were born on the same dd mm, now if I ready to do this experiment do you think one can guarantee me of a repetition if I go and talk to forty people may be not. Look at the previous example, if I take eight people for sure two people will be born on the same day but if I ask them dd mm there are three hundred and sixty five possibilities, three sixty six possibilities if you include the leap year. Unless I have more than this number assume, I had some four hundred people then I know some two people will have the same dd mm if I take less than three sixty five can I guarantee? May be not. But I will challenge you all that if you go on the road side and stop forty people who are going by and ask them their dd mm in forty or fifty counts you will definitely see two people with the same dd mm you don’t believe me come let’s go and conduct this excise and check whether what I am saying is right or not?
BIRTHDAY PARADOX-FIND YOUR TWIN 02
We just now saw the professor talk about birthday paradox. Do you share your birthday with someone else? Let’s check in the crowd. Can I please know your birth date and month? Yeah it’s eighteenth December, fifteenth July, fifteenth July ok thank you, birthday is fifteenth January, sixteenth November nineteen ninety four, twenty first august, my birthday is on fifteenth of January, my birthday falls on fifteenth June, we have professor abhinav sir with us, sir may I please know your birth date and month? So its eleventh of December, hi mam can I please know your birthday and month? First of December, nineteenth January, yeah its fourteenth august, twenty second April, yeah its fifth January, fifth October, thirty first august, thirty first august thank you, twentieth November, sure its twenty third July, forth Jan, fifteenth July, eighteenth July, eighteenth September, mam twenty July, twenty first December, yeah its twenty sixth November, thirteenth march, February twenty, twenty four august, third august, fourteenth of july, twenty second of September, thirteenth march, sixth December, eighth December, june twenty ninth, twenty three may, twenty seven june, fifteen march, twenty fourth august, twenty first April, its fifteenth august, seventeenth September, eighth April, eleven june nineteen ninety eight, twenty fifth December nineteen ninety seven, first January, tenth july, eighth October, fifth October. Ok thank you.
BIRTHDAY PARADOX-FIND YOUR TWIN 03
As you know we collected the birth dates of some fifty people and guess what, we don’t need three sixty six people to encounter the collision. Actually we encountered a collision in sample of nine people so let us try to simulate this paradox using a program. Before we get into the details of the programme let me give you a brief introduction of the programme for birthday paradox for birthday paradox we will be generating the birth dates randomly I repeat will be generating the birth date randomly and we will not fetch it from the data. We will only generate the birth dates randomly. So now the question arises how can we generate birth dates randomly so birth date will be generated according to the birth month as you know some month comprise of thirty one days and some month comprise of thirty days so we have January, march, may, July, august, October and December they comprise of thirty one days we have April June September November they comprise of thirty days so birth date will be generating according to the birth months as we are generating only birth date we are not concerned about the birth year. Yes we are not concerned about the birth year we will be only generating the date and the month that’s it. So there is an exception here as you know February has twenty eight days or twenty nine days, if the given year is a leap year then the February has twenty nine days else February has twenty eight days. So how can we determine that the given year is a leap here or not? So our question becomes that. For a leap year most of the years that can be divided by four are leap years you know this fact. But there is an exception here also century years century years I mean like five hundred, six hundred, thousand, sixteen hundred, seventeen hundred these are the century years. Century years are not leap years unless they are divided by four hundred, that means if we have seventeen hundred it is divided by four but it is not a leap year. Because this is a century year ok but if we have sixteen hundred it is divided by four hundred ok that means sixteen hundred is a century year as well as leap year. So I repeat most of the years that can be divided by four are leap years but there is an exception here century years are not leap years unless they are divided by four hundred yes unless they are divided by four hundred so now I will show you the pseudo code of how to determine whether the given year is a leap year or not? So we have first of all we will check if the given year is divisible by four hundred then it is definitely a leap year else if it is divisible by hundred then it is not a leap year. I repeat if it is divisible by hundred then it is not a leap year OK, else if the year is divisible by four then it is a leap year and for rest of the cases the given year is not a leap year. So will go through the pseudo code again, first of all you have to check whether the year is divisible by four hundred or not if it is divisible by four hundred then it is a leap year, else if the year is divisible by hundred that means it is not a leap year else if year is divisible by four then it is definitely a leap year else for rest of the cases the given year is not a leap year. So first of all let me try to code this particular function this particular thing of how to determine whether the given year is a leap year or not? So let us do that. So I will just open anaconda spyder and try to
 
code this. So first of all let me start with how to determine whether the given year is a leap year or not? So I will just generate here randomly or you can also make the user input that particular year, so I will just generate it randomly I hope you know the random library we have already explained it. For example I take the year from ninety three to twenty eighteen ok? As we are using random we should import random here too. Next is we have to write the pseudo code here not the pseudo code the proper code according to the pseudo code. So let us do that I will use if here, so first of all I will say if year percent four is equal to is equal to zero ok and year percent hundred is not equal to zero then I will use or year percent four hundred is equal to is equal to zero, this is according to the pseudo code that I just now explained, I will repeat it again century years the years that divisible by four are leap years but there is an exception here century years are not leap years unless they are divided by four hundred this is the pseudo code that we are using here so after that what I will do is we have generated the year randomly and we will also return the if condition for the year if this conditions satisfies that means you have to print given year is a leap year OK else you have to print given year is not a leap year. So we are done with the programme for leap year so let us try to run it, I will just write leap dot py. Given year is not a leap year so let me try to print the value of year also so that we can get to know whether the given year is a actually leap year or not. Whether our program working fine or not? So let us check that twenty sixteen given year is a leap year? Yes you can see that twenty sixteen is divisible by four and it is also not a century year so it is a leap year let me try to run it again we have twenty eighteen, yes twenty eighteen is not a leap year. Again so let me try to zoom it so that you can also see ok here we have two thousand five is not a leap year again two thousand three it is not a leap year again, twenty sixteen yes this is a leap year again twenty eleven it is not a leap year, two thousand one not a leap year. So this is how we can code the leap year thing so let us move ahead and try to understand the integrities of the programme for birthday paradox. So now that we are done with the leap year code I hope you understood that code so let us move ahead ok, here what we are trying to do here is now we have to write a pseudo code generate the birth dates randomly ok. So as I said different month comprise of different number of days so we have to take care of all the months and we have to generate the days accordingly so we have here if the given month is February and year is a leap year then we have to generate the day randomly from one to twenty nine, if the month is February and the year is leap year then we have to generate the day randomly from one to twenty nine. If the month is February and the year is not the leap year then we have to generate the day randomly from one to twenty eight, yes. We have to generate the day randomly from one to twenty eight then if the month divides by two ok, we have months numbered from one to twelve ok, and if it divides by two that means and the month is less than seven that the month is either april or june ok, then we have to generate the day randomly from one to thirty, january february march april and june ok. So this is it for the month that is less than seven now if the month divides by two and the month is greater than seven, what we are referring here? We are referring here, referring to the month august, october and december then we have to generate the day randomly from one to thirty one ok now if

the month doesn’t divide by two and it is less than equal to seven here we are referring to january march may or july these months comprise of thirty one days, yes these months comprise of thirty one days. Now the last condition is left that is if the month doesn’t divide by two and the month is greater than seven then we have to generate the day randomly from one to thirty, we are referring september and november here, we are referring september and November here, please note the fact that we are not checking the condition for february, since we have checked it at the first place. Since we have checked the condition for the February at the first place we don’t need to check it again. So we will start with February because February is an exception here, we have either twenty eight days or twenty nine days in February. After that we are done with February then we can take into count the months that comprise of either thirty days or thirty one days. So I repeat here first of all you have to check whether the month is february and the given year is a leap year or not ok, if the given year is a leap year then you have to generate the day randomly from one to twenty nine other wise you have to generate the day randomly from one to twenty eight, after that you have to take into count the months that comprise of either thirty days or thirty one days. If the month is divisible by two and it is less than seven then you have to generate the day randomly from one to thirty, if the month is divisible by two and the month is greater than seven then you have to generate the day randomly from one to thirty one, if it is not divisible by two and it is less than equal to seven that means we are also referring july here, you have to generate the day randomly from one to thirty one and the last case if it is not divisible by two and it is greater than seven then you have to generate the day randomly from one to thirty. This is how we are going to proceed in the program, you will get to know more about it when we will write a program about birthday paradox.
BIRTHDAY PARADOX-FIND YOUR TWIN 04
Welcome to the programme screen caste of birthday paradox, first of all let us take the birth dates of some fifty people and try to find out the collisions. Here we will be generating the birth dates of these fifty people randomly in order to generate the birth dates randomly will import the library here that is called random. Let us take the birthday array on list, now as you have to generate the birth dated of fifty people will have a while loop here I is equal to zero while I is less than fifty. First of all let us generate the year randomly, year is equal to random dot randint, randint is the function that is used to generate the integers random, you also need to specify the range in the function randint here I will specify from eighteen ninety five to twenty seventeen, why I particularly choose eighteen ninety five because the oldest person every lived was one twenty two years old so if you subtract one twenty two from twenty seventeen you will get eighteen ninety five, that’s why we choose eighteen ninety five I am writing here the oldest person ever lived was one twenty two years old. Now we have to check whether this particular year is leap year or not? Why do we have to check whether this particular year is leap year or not because in order to generate a particular day we have to check that the particular year is a leap year or not because in the month of February in a leap year we have twenty nine days otherwise in the month of February we have twenty eight days so we will also check that the given year is a leap year or not. In order to check whether the given year the randomly generated year is leap year or not we will have if here, if year percent four is equal to is equal to zero and year percent hundred shouldn’t be equal to zero or we can just say that year percent four hundred is equal to is equal to zero. Will have a even here leap this is equal to one if the condition satisfies else this is equal to zero. Now let us generate the month randomly, for month we will use the function randint again, month is equal to random dot randint what will be the ranger it will be from one to twelve. Now we are done with generating year and month randomly. Let us proceed towards day, now let us generate the day randomly. In order to generate the days randomly we will have a nested if else loop here for a nested if else loop will have if month is equal to is equal to two and the given year is the leap year, what do I mean by this? Is this that the month is February and the given year is a leap year so we will generate the day from one to twenty nine that will be random dot randint from one to twenty nine? Else if, if month is equal to is equal to two and leap is equal to is equal to zero, if the month is February but the given year is not a leap year so will have day is equal to random dot randint as one to twenty eight next we have to check please note that the seventh month and the eight month they both have thirty one days so we will have to heart quote this to so will have here the month is equal to is equal to seven or month is equal to is equal to eight will generate the days from one to thirty one next we have to keep the fact in mine if month percent two is not equal to zero and the month is less than seven so we will generate the days from one to thirty one you can easily figure this out, please note the fact you can easily figure this out, why I am writing so because if the given month is in odd numbered month and the month is also less than seven then we can say that we will have to generate the days from one to thirty one. Next condition if it is greater than seven that is the next condition. For that the given month will be a even numbered month,
 
month two is equal to is equal to zero and month is greater than seven and it is less than twelve too. So we will here day is equal to random dot randint one to thirty one we have specified the condition for twenty eight, twenty nine, thirty one so the rest of the month will obviously comprise of thirty days so we will just have else day is equal to random dot randint from one to thirty this is done. So we have now the birth date of these fifty people plus please note the fact, please not this fact in mind that we don’t have it in a specified format, we need to have it in a specified format in order to do that I will generate a, I will import a library here a separate library here that is date time. Next we have to convert it into particular format so I will use the function of date time that date time dot date and I can specify the format here in the round braces will have year month day this is the format I am calling, you can call the any other format but I am calling year month day. Then we have day of year, why do we need to find the day of year? As the professor explained in the lecture that we will only consider the dd mm this is self-explanatory if you want to find out the collisions in the birth date we need to only consider the dd mm of different people so we have the dd mm of different people but we need to generate the day of the year. If you will generate the particular day that the person is born on then we can find out the collisions very easily for example if I am born on second January ninety three that means I am born on second day of the year in the same way we will generate the days of year of these fifty people and try to find out the collisions. In order to get the day of year, we will just use the simple function here please concentrate we have dd that is date in a particular format dot timetuple dot tm y day this is the function that is straight away give you the date of year ok, if you want to code it you can also code it this will be good practice for you but for simplicity sake we will only use the function here. Now we will increment the I variable so that the while loop can proceed and we will also append this particular day of year through the list birthday, appended day of year that is done next sort this particular list when this particular list is ready just sort this. What is sorting? Sorting is basically arranging the elements in ascending or descending order, since we are using the function sort here it will erase the elements in ascending order you can always code it, this will be good exercise for you guys but for simplicity sake we will use the function sort here. Now we are done with the code we just want to print this particular array so that we can get to know the collisions. It will be easy on our mind to find out the collisions if the array sorts it that’s why we are sorting the array. Just print birthday I and increment this while loop. I think we are done with the programme and let us try to run this programme. See we have a list of birth dates here particularly the day of year, if you want to find the collision lets have the look at the output. We have fifteen fifteen one collision here we have one hundred four one hundred four the second collision, two not four two not four that is the third collision and here and I don’t think we have another collision here so will have three collisions in this list of thirty people, we can always increase the number of people here and will get more collisions. Let us try to run this again if we run this again we have forty eight forty eight one collision seventy two seventy two second collision, one eighty eight one eighty eight third collision I don’t think so another two eighty three two righty three forth collision so you can always increase the number of people and try to find out the collisions the collisions will increase and you can re run the loop re run this program again and again you can have different number of collisions too. So this program clearly illustrated the presence of the

birthday paradox. I hope this program was useful for you guys and you enjoy it this programming screen cast see you till the next programming screen cast thank you.
BIRTHDAY PARADOX-FIND YOUR TWIN 05
Now that we are done with the program of birthday paradox, you must remember we used a library name date time minute so let me try to explore this library and show you what else can we do with library date time, date time library can be used to display even today’s date so how can you do that? So you just write date time dot date dot today with round braces so it will display the todays date the current date ok you can even segregate the date in terms of year month and date for that what you need to do is , I will just write for that you just need to write dot strftime in round braces you have to specify what do you want to display, I need to display only year, just write percent y so it is twenty eighteen next I want to display the month you just write B capital B so it has displayed the current month and if I write d it will display the date so it is thirty first. Ok so it can be used to display many other things also so I just go though them first of all if you want to display the week number of the year, week number of the year how can you display that. I will just write so that you also keep a track of what we are doing, week number of the month, how can you do that? You just write date time again dot date dot today dot strftime and in round braces you just write capital W percent capital W. So week number of the month is twenty two. I repeat week number of the month is twenty two. So after this what can we do? After that if you want to display week day of the weak so you need to write, what do you need to write? I will again write week day of the weak again you have to write date time dot date dot today dot strftime and in that you write small w percent small w press enter so week day of the weak is four ok that’s how you can use the day time library there are others thing through which you can also use I will show you one or two examples more first as if you want to display the day of year ok, how can you do that? Print day of year for that again you have to write date time dot date dot today dot strftime and in bracket you write small j so let us press enter, day of year is one fifty one. after that you want to display the day of the month and the day of the week is also possible that is you can also do that so I will just show you how you can do the day of week ok so let us do day of week for that you just need to write first of all write here day of week yes and how can you do that? What do you need to change here? You need to write percent ‘A’ capital ‘A’ that will display day of week. So day of week is Thursday it is actually Thursday today so this is how you can use day time library you can also use it to display the current time, how can you do that? I will just show you. You just write date time again date time dot now so it display the current time, first of all it will display the date and then it will display hours minutes seconds this I show it works date time dot day time dot now it display the current time. I hope this date time library exploration is useful to you guys happy leaning.
WHAT’S YOUR FAVOURITE MOVIE?
Babumoshai, zindagi lambi nahi, badi honi chahiye this is a dialogue from one of my favourite Hindi movie ‘Anand’, you must be wondering what I am talking? Well this is what our next joy is all about, movies.
GUESS THE MOVIE NAME 01
I am going to tell you all a nice new game, the game is called guess the movie name. Right so the game is very simple, I will try to write a movie name like this ok? There is this movie with one two three four five six seven letters can you guess the name of the movie? Obviously there are gonna be a lot of movies with this with seven letters so I will give you a hint, it’s a Hollywood movie and a very popular one can you guess? It’s obviously tough, so what will do, will go step by step you tell me a letter in the movie if the letter is present in the movie I will writer that letter in the right place. E, e is not there in this movie go on sir take L, L, L no it’s not there, A yeah A is there as the fourth letter in the movie ok, sir take S, S? S is not there in the movie, T, T is there, sir I titanic yes perfect. Oh ok when I said I, I should actually write I here as well but anyway now you understand the rules of the game correct? So let me play the another game right now ok? By another game I mean another instance of the dame game. Alright? There can be space in between two I will not exclusively write the space here tat’s it ok. Ten letters go ahead I, I is not there sit take A, A no it’s not there A is common so I thought of taking A, A is not here ok it’s not there. E E is there, in only one place O I think you guessed it, the moment you think you have guessed it tell me ok D no D is not there, sir T, T for Tarzan no T is not there S is there S is not there, R R is not there only giving me letters that are not here go on D D is not there, N, N is there, K yeah it’s a book phone book no its not phone book this is the book and this is the six letter word sir hint? Hint! It’s a very popular Hollywood movie so popular that everyone knows it. Including a two year old may be a three year old two year old ok ok from two year old to sixty year old everyone knows the movie very popular movie dreamt it many a times giving hints is not part of the game just try to keep them interested, S no, you know what no more letters I think you guys should guess what is the name of the movie I am sure all my audients over there who are watching this would have guessed long long back the moment you gave the second word it’s so obvious what’s the name of the movie sir P is there, P is not there C is there no very very very easy so easy that there are very few movies with this second word book, J J yes J is there jumangee! Jumangee!! No no no no no jungle book! Jungle book ha ha ha wasn’t that easy? What was confusing for you people? I never heard of this movie as I guessed it, you haven’t heard this movie? No I am not, I have heard but, iit students they don’t know what is jungle book movie any ways never mind just kidding ok last last game and let’s get started with some discussion about this this game alright? Ok go ahead space is there between the word, no. One word, E no E is not there A, A is there S is not there S is not there, R yes R sis there O, O isn’t there, U isn’t there aggressively you should guess probably D, D? No. M, M perfect C, C no, E E no again here audients would have guessed T, T perfect MATRIX ha ha ha ha ok so let me ask you people something why was it difficult for you people to guess? You see there are twenty six possibilities per slot even for a three lettered word there are so many possibilities if it was just three letters something like six letters will be twenty six into twenty six into twenty six into twenty six that’s a huge possibility space and people generally tend to think of all possibilities because there are so many movies with six letters that you will go on exhausting the list of movies you have watched only one of them will match and
 
they match slowly the idea is to probably use vowels first because vowels will certainly be there once vowels are there you can start with abcde and then go till z right? But the idea of the game is to guess it very quickly now he has the question for you all, can you try writing a piece of code can you programme? And use a let say audients should you start the programme user starts the programme and then there is a random dashes that come and then user inputs a letter, the letter is there it should pop up the letters the way I wrote, if it is not there it should say letter not found, how easy or difficult would this game be? Easy to code, easy to code! How will you start off? What will you do? I will take an array of the number and the size of the array of will be the number if characters present in the movie name I will store the I will also firstly now firstly don’t you think we should have list of movie names for the computer, right it should have a list of movies name from where it will pick the movie name uniformly or randomly it should randomly pick, once it picked it should see what are the total number of dashes assume it picks the movie inception I n c e p t i o n inception is nine letters correct? You should put nine dashes and then the user inputs z it should say beep no z not found, if he inputs I you must go to the first one and then I inception and you have two I’s correct? It should display two I’s and the remaining stuff should be dashes, you can add in some nice variety to the game where you can give them points, you give them ten points if they guess it in one go they get ten points every chance they take you should deduct one point that makes the game interesting right? So can we try writing a piece of code for this? Let’s try.
GUESS THE MOVIE NAME 02
So, how does one go ahead and write a piece of code for this, all you need to do is have a list of movie names, as a python list of movie names which you can modify as per your requirements and then you must randomly put a movie name assign it to a variable and that will be the secret word and the user will start punching in the letters as in, when she punches the letter it should be displayed in this blank spaces. It should be displaced if the letter is there or not, the idea is to guess the movie name with very few attempts.
GUESS THE MOVIE NAME 03
You would have seen an interesting game in the last video sir has a movie in his mind he just writes as many number of blanks as there are number of letters in that movie name the person for playing with sir has to guess what could be the movie he has in his mind, just filling the blanks is difficult see even you would take movie name with five letters say then even for that you have a lot of possibilities errors so many movies that could be available with five letters so it is difficult for the person on the other side to guess what could be the movie he has in his mind so he is given the flexibility the person can say I assume that this particular letter is present in the movie name so he can guess one letter at a time so he says whether this letter is present or not he asks sir basically whether this particular letter is present or not, smart strategy will be generally to start with vowels because mostly vowels will be present in any name so a e I o u with the vowels if you start you can open lot of blanks you can open up and you can guess the movie name that is the smart strategy generally we use so for example if I say a I want to guess whether a is present in the movie name so in case if a is present the person who has posted the question will write a in those blanks wherever a was present in that movie name in case if it is not present he would say it is not present you come up with the next guess other letter. So, this way by unravelling each and every possibility of letter you try to guess the movie name this is how the game goes, alright? We have just taken few top rated movies from imdb that is the internal movie data base so let us have a list of those movies here first as a part of our programming let us have a list of those movies, movies let me have it as a list the first we had was ‘anand’ in the second was ‘drishyam’ and the third was ‘nayakan’ the forth was ‘anbe sivam’ so go I have taken the fifth is ‘gol maal’ the sixth one is ‘vikram vedha’ so it’s ‘vikram vedha’ the seventh one is black Friday the eighth is ‘dangal’ ninth is ‘manichithrarhazhu’ and the tenth one is ‘taare zameen par’ so may be for each of users because we have to switch between caps and small it would be difficult so let me make everything in small letters that just for our ease, it actually doesn’t matter may be you can have all caps or anything as you wish its convenient for me if everything is in small so let me make everything in small letters. I have ten movies I have taken top ten from the imdb, you can take as many movies as you wish or you can include your favourite movie as per your wish this list completely up to you, you can have as many the ones which ever you wish you can have it any ways as you want this list is completely up so we have our list of movies now let’s play we will start our game. So this thing if you would see here it says undefined name play so you say I want to play but the computer doesn’t know what to be done if you say play so you have to define what is play? So you are defining def play this is the particular syntax to define new functionality if that is if I say play this are the tasks that has to be done, you are defining it. So we will define what has to be the game we will define basically what has to be done if someone says play. So here let me say I have two players as you have seen in the video there were two players and one person was posting the question here that we make it the computer posting the question the list of movies we have given are already the list of movies from this list the computer is posting the question so just that is the change here and we will assume the there are two players to play the game so this is the two
 
players game basically so we will have player one name I want to each will be having a name it will be good if you would refer them by their name they will feel a personalised thing of playing the personalised play they could feel if you use their name instead of just calling player one player two x y something like that you just use their own name it would be good so I have to input his name so I input it to get the input I should give him a suitable message that please enter your name so only then he can understand what do I actually except in this time and he will give the proper input so I have to give the message input message that is for this particular message, read this message and give your input something like that what could I give? I can give player one please enter sorry enter your name, I have asked his name the same has to be done for player two as well so let me copy paste it I am sorry I will copy paste this let me copy and let me paste here, the only change here is it’s player two not the player one again it should be player two and here to we need a different variable that’s why there is a warning ps here that is that’s the same name there is a warning that you could see here this warning appears because there are two things with the same name p one you had used earlier p one name and the same p one name you had used earlier so if I change it may be this particular thing will be resolved and now this warning is because it is assigned but it is never used but this will be used in the upcoming part of the code but that would be taken care of that would be fixed this particular warning symbol that is appearing here would be fixed as the code proceeds. So let us so let us start off with the next part so for both the players initially we will have zero points so let me initialise that points for player one is zero points for player two is also zero so I have initialised and if you would see we alternate the turns of the players like may be player one gets a chance to guess the movie name the next would go to the next player this would be an interesting variant if you would alternate and see who gets the highest score probably there are other variants may be familiar with this is one of the interesting variant that we will be implementing now alright so keep track of the turn who has to lay next we will have some variable called turn so let me initialise it, let me start the value of turn with zero so why zero nothing special it is general practice in computer science to count form zero you can start from anything basically what has to be taken care of is the turns must be alternated between the two players so player one gets a chance now the next must go to player two the next chance must go to player one the next must go to player two and this chain must be happening so to take care of that you can start from any value only thing is you have to take care of the strict alteration that is the both must get the chance equally that should not be the case that same person get chance again and again that should not be the case so that we have to take care of it that’s it. So for that we have a variable turn it’s just a general practice of computer science to start counting form zero that why I have initialised zero nothing special you can start from any value, so let me say the players are willing to continue the game or not willing to continue the game so this could be the two states as the players keep playing some may be it is a two player game so we need both the players to play in case if someone is not willing to continue then the game comes to an end so to keep track of whether they are willing to continue or not so I would say willing I will keep a variable willing initially will have that to true because this is the start off the game so let us keep it true and as long as the players are willing you have to play the game so let me say while willing while willing so as long as they are willing, as long as both the players are willing you continue the game so this is how now here comes the actual game and I say the turn has

to be alternated so same here I have started the value of turn with zero you may start with any particular value at the value zero it is the turn of player one at the value one it is the turn of player two at the value two it is the turn of player one again at the value three it is the turn of player two again and this is how it goes as you would observed if the turn value is zero two four six eight and so on it is a turn of player one if it is one three five seven nine and so on it is the turn of player two so every even value of turn is the turn of player one and odd value is the turn of player two, how do we keep track of this? Even and odd values there is an operator called the modulo operator, what it does is, it divides and returns the reminder of division so to check whether the number is odd or even you would divide the number by two and check the reminder, for all even numbers dividing by two would give you the reminder zero for all odd numbers dividing by two will give the reminder one so we will use this concept and check whether the particular value is odd or even so the turn has to be check if it is odd or even so let me check if turn modulo sorry its turn modulo two is equals to equal equal to zero why did I use double equal to because single equal to is assignment basically whatever be the value I don’t care just assign this value something like that this is I want to check the equality, I want to retain the value and check it with some standard value so for that some equality check I will apply use double equal to symbol so if this is equal to zero that is even value the turn is even value, if it is even then you divide by two you will get the reminder zero so if that happen if turn turned out to be even number then it should be the turn of player one ok let me write that it is the turn of player one ok so we have to first start off by telling that it is his turn print player ones name you have taken print his name and say that it is your turn player one this is your turn just say him the message alright? So what should we be doing now? We should randomly pick a movie from this list of movies, there is a list of movies with us from that list we randomly pick a movie so let me say that it is picked movie picked movie is nothing but for randomly picking a movie you need there is a built in library called random we need to import it lets import it now import random so this is a built in library that would be used in order to pick something randomly from a given list or from a given range something like that for random selections this particular library is used so for picking randomly from the given list we use the function called choice it is define in this random library so I will be calling it as random dot choice within this I need to pass the list as the argument let me the name of this list is movies so I will pass movies so basically what this does here, from this list movies you pick a random choice and assign that to picked movie variable so you are picking a random movie this is what is done here. Now once I have picked a movie I need to create the question that is basically I need to give blanks that many number of blanks so here I will be stimulating blanks as stars so if the movie contain say for example here in our six letters say dangal is the movie I have picked it contains six letters I need to represent six blanks here I am representing blanks in stars so I need to represent six stars so I should create the question in that format this is my picked movie is dangal for that I need to create a question so I have to create a question here so let me do that let me say, you create a question for the picked movie that is picked movie as some six characters in my case as I have said then six stars must be present and in case if the picked movie for example say it is something like anbe sivam, ‘Vikram Veda’ or taare zameen par these movies have spaces in between so the spaces may not be encoded by stars, spaces must be retained as spaces just the letters must be encoded as stars so this encoding thing I have to do this thing let me say I

have to create the question so this is what is the task I have to do, create a question and once the question is created I need to capture the created question so let me capture it in a variable called question so I had created a question alright so I have once the question is created and captured I need to print it print this question print the question and till now the answer is not yet said that is the person has not yet said the answer so let me say he has not said the answer not said I will have a variable to keep tracking of whether the person as said the answer or not said the answer, so let me say this particular value is true not said is true. Alright so as long as he says the answer now we need to continue here so I will say while not said not said as long as the person as not said the answer continue the game so what should you do? You should ask him to guess a character so let me take the input character let me say it as ch, ch be my character or let me say letter that is better intuitive name, so let me say letter letter input I have to input the character your letter this is the your intuitive message I feel you can modify this message as you wish that’s never an issue the thing is as how the question will be post and the person is ask to guess the whether this particular letter is present in that movie name or not that is what I am doing your letter please enter your letter this is what I want so I will inputting that so when I have to check if that letter is present or not so let me say if that letter is present is present of that letter in the picked movie, a movie was picked right so we have to check whether that letter is present in this picked movie or not so if this is present you have to unlock the blanks wherever the letter was present that part has to be taken care of here, else it’s a simple thing so let me complete that first and lets come back to this part of unlocking else what should I do print his letter whatever he has print he has guessed is not found, this is the message to be print, this is simple so let’s see till now we input the name of the players start with zero points each we have a variable turn to keep track of who has to play now and we have a variable willing to keep track of whether they want to continue the game or they want to quit the game so as long as they are willing we have to play the game we first start with checking the value of turn we first start with checking the value of turn here if that is an even value then it is the turn of player one else so corresponding else let me write here so that it is, it is not skipped let me write the corresponding value it is in column nine so I need to write the corresponding else in column nine it’s in column nine ok hence this is the turn of player two ok so once they’re both the turns are over what should we be doing is we need to increment the value of turn that is this person has played now this will be the turn of next person so I am increasing the value by one, turn is equal to turn plus one this is how I have incremented the value of turn so this is the outline of our play method we have meant completed it just an outline this is a rough idea of how the game will go maybe you pause for sometime look into the outline understand the flow of the game then proceed with it let’s proceed with the missing parts here in the next session of this video thanks for watching till now please watch next videos in order to completely understand how this program will work thank you.
GUESS THE MOVIE NAME 04
Alright guys, till now we have seen general outline of the game let me just give you a very quick summary of what has happened till now see these are the list of movies we have collected this from imdb top rated Indian movies, when we come to the actual game, when we come to the actual playing part the first thing we do is we are getting the names of the players, this is just to give the personalised feel to the players and we start off with zero points to both the players and we have variable we started off with zero points to both the players as you could see here and we have a variable turn that is use to keep track of whose turn it is that is the turns has to be alternatives, the players will have to get their turns in the alternating sequence for that reason we have a variable turn and we have another variable called willing that says whether the players want to continue the game or they want to quit the game, so this particular thing willing initially I have to set it true because I have to start the game and during the run off the game the players may choose to quit at any time and it is a two player game so it requires both the players to be present in the game, in case if any one says I want to quit I don’t want to continue next the game comes to an end and the status till now will be displayed at the end of the game. So, this is how the game goes and this is we had assign we had started the value of turn from zero and this is just a convention in computer science to start counting from zero nothing hard and fast you can do anything as you wish, I had started from zero so the turn zero two four six that is the even numbers turn corresponds to player one that is been captured by this modulo operator and odd number turns will correspond to player two we had given an outline of the game in player one so we had, we had started off with this see when it is the turn we have to display that this is this person turn so I had given a message player one this is your turn something like that I had given a message. I have randomly pick a movie from the list of movies we have and create a question out of it, creating a question is nothing but we would have blanks in the conventional game, here I am encoding the blanks with stars that is, in case the movie has five letters in its name, five stars will be displayed in place of the letters and please note that in case if there are spaces for example if you would see ‘thare zameen par’ or ‘vikram veeda’ these movies have spaces in their names, so in case there are spaces the spaces would be left as such, only the letters will be encoded as stars, so in case if I take ‘taare zameen par’, five stars followed by a space followed by six stars followed by a space followed by three stars. This is how we need to encode it this encoding process let me call it as we are creating the question, so we create the question we take the question and print the question, we show the question to the player and we have a variable to keep track of whether the player has set some answer or not so initially he hasn’t said that answer so I said not said is true, so as long as he says the answer repeat this, what we do is, we ask him to guess a letter that could be present in the movie, and if that letter is present we need to unlock those spaces, those star where that letter is present otherwise we have to say the letter is not found, for example see if ‘taare zameen par’ is the movie that has been picked and if the user wants to know if the letter ‘u’ is present in the movie name, you could see letter ‘u’ is not present here so I will say ‘u’ not found. In case if he types letter ‘a’ a is present twice here, once here once here so in all these
 
corresponding places I will unlock I will say this is ‘a’ after unlocking it becomes star a, a star, star, star a star, star, star, star a star and spaces would be just spaces there, there is no encoding nothing but in the precious encoding all letters are made stars we would unlock only those places where the letter ‘A’ is present, this unlocking part has to be done otherwise we will just display the message that this particular letter is not found ok ,now let us look at the unlocking part so let me say after unlocking those letters we get the modified question, so I will say this is modified question, let me call this as a modified question to get the modified question what should I do? I should unlock, unlock all that I need is the previous question or the question that comes during this run because as you could see with A unlocked the user may either guess the movie name or maybe he could require more guesses like maybe he want to say I want to unlock more letters may be he want to unlock if letter I is present if letter e is present, he may try for various possibilities so it is not always the case that with just one letter unlocked the user can guess the movie name so it may happen anything so I should take the modified question from the previous run. Modified question from the previous run and the picked movie name I need to have a reference because I need to unlock his choice of letter if it is present. If the letter is present I need to unlock it so, for unlocking it I need to refer to the picked movie name originally and this is his character preference I need to pass so I need to unlock those letters using these parameters, I need to have unlock functionality which requires these parameters so the modified question here and here the difference is this is the question modified based on the previous one see, I will give you an example just take the same thing taare zameen par if this is the movie if the user wants to unlock ‘a’ these will be unlocked and now the new question will be star ‘a’ ‘a’ star, star space star ‘a’ star, star, star, star space star ‘a’ star this will be the new question, this has to be passed and suppose during the second guess the letter he wants to unlock is ‘e’ then ch will carry the value of ‘e’ and to unlock ‘e’ where all e has been present in the movie you need to refer to it, so I am passing the picked movie as well, I need this value as with so this is the modified question based on the previous one so what will be the this particular thing in the first run, so for that let me store here modify question is nothing but your question itself in the first run, in the first run it is all stars, during the subsequent runs the modified question may vary that depends on what are the letters you have already unlocked ok? So you have modified it so modified question is obtained to you so let me now print the modified question, I have to print the modified question. Ok print it modified question now I should say the user has to decide now, if he wants to continue, if he wants to guess the movie name with this or he wants to unlock another character so let me say this is decision so d let me call it d, I will take his decision as a form of am input I can give him an message see press one to guess the movie or two to unlock another character another letter I could say so this is once the unlocked the modified question has been displayed after unlocking the particular letter he has to decide whether he knows the movie name he want to guess it right the way or he wants to unlock another letter so this particular decision is taken care of here. So once the decision has been taken in case he wants to say I want to guess the movie name, if that is we had given if one is for guessing the movie name, if his decision is one then you have to collect an answer from him, answer you have to input it from him, let me say, let me give a colon here for clarity sake let me say here it is, I need to give a message let me say your answer, I am asking him to give his answer, so for this he will give an input answer we need to check if that answer is exactly the

same as the picked movie name so, I am checking if answer is exactly equal to picked movie. Ok, in case if that is equal then I would say increase his points by one so already his new points for player one is nothing but his old points plus one, this is his new points so, I have increase his points by one. so I have to let him know that his answer is correct, I have to print that his answer is correct and I will have to make this not said I have used the variable not said based on which game will continue I have to make it false because initially he has not said the answer so I had made it true now given that he has said the answer not said should become false, names I have used so it is easier to understand the code this is generally a better practice to name your variables such that it is easy for anyone to understand the code, the code is not just for you even if you go work in the collaborative environment in a company or anything even you work in teams it may be the case that you would be the one who could and there me be someone who tests your code because it’s generally the thing is pretend to cover our mistake that is how human tendency we tends to cover our mistakes, so the person who has written the code if he is given an opportunity to check whether the code is perfect or not he knows what are the mistakes could occur during the, during the coding process he would have tested and he would have got some mistakes, he would try to hide that mistake so the actual quality could not be could not be so in order to get the actual quality what they generally do is they would ask another person there would be another person called the tester, he would be the one who has assigned the responsibility of testing the code, so for him to test the code for him to give inputs such that you can check through how the flow is what are all the calculations being done to check through all that the code must be highly readable and when you work in teams, when your particular portions is being used by someone else or someone else portion you are using and you are depending on it, it is highly important that your code is properly readable and to make it readable one time that we generally give is you give your variable names in a intuitive manners see just as how I have given western modified western picked movie not said all these are English words that speak in itself, you may not say for what purpose you have been using this particular variable name that is quite intuitive people can easily understand just any one knows English will be able to understand the flow of this programme in such a way we are coding as to be done this is a general tip that people use to give when working in teams. So this is the take home message you need to take here alright let’s get back not said initially the person has not said the answer so it must may true now given that he has said the answer not said should we make false, not said should be made false. And now I should print him his code, the person name player’s one name I have to print here his code your score ok let me say this is points of player one so how much as he score, I should let him know. So this is done till now what has happened we have unlocked the character we have modified the question and we for modifying the question we take the modified question from the previous run, in the very first run the modified question is nothing but the question itself with all letters encoded as stars and spaces left as such, this is the modified question at the first run and subsequent runs, the modified question will be based on what are the letters you have unlocked in the previous runs. So that is why we are using the modified question on both the places, this is the place where generally the beginners would feel it difficult to understand please pause here try to give it a thought, try to take your sheet of paper, you try running it as I had said an example take may be this particular name or black Friday or ‘vikram Veda’ something like that. Spaces

as well as the name is also length here so take something like that, you would get an idea of what all could be the case may be user wants to guess one character he is not able to guess the movie just with one character and because of which in subsequent run what should be the expected modified question you just try run once you pause over here think understand this fully then lets proceed to it, so I would recommend it you understand up to here completely so please give a pause here understand completely and once you are completely thorough please proceed to the next part alright I hope you would have paused and understood the flow till here lets continue and each player must be given a chance whether he wants to continue the game or quit so that will have to ask here. Will say we are asking this along this it has to come so after he has said the answer so this is, this loop runs till he gives the answer after he has said the answer you have to ask him so this consenter column thirteen, ok column thirteen we should go to column thirteen I should ask whether he wants to continue, so for continue let me use c this is for continuing. I am inputting his decision his choice whether he wants to continue or quit the game so let me say press one to continue or zero to quit let me save this and I would see if zero is for quit so if his choice is zero, if his choice to continue or not if it is zero then I should give him a summary, so let me say I have to say print player one his score we have to print so let me print his name first player one name your score ok I have to print his score so which is points of player one, points of player one this is his score now I need to do the same for player two let me I am sorry let me copy paste the same because it’s the same just that in place of player one I am going to use player two, I will paste it and I will have to change here see its player twos name and even here I have to change it it is points of player two and now I will just have some nice greeting message would make it more personalise so let me have a greeting message here thanks for playing, have a nice. This is up to you, you can give any number of messages as you wish, this is just to give a personalise feeling to the players that’s it, have a nice day. So this is we have treated and now we are not willing to continue so this particular thing this value we had set willing as true that should be set as false, willing should be set as false, will make it as false. This is he is not willing to continue that is the meaning here alright so let us have a very quick summary of what has happened till now, we have the list of movies taken from imdb the top rated movies from imdb we have inputted the players name, initialised both their points as zero have a variable to keep track of turn, that is whose turn it is player one or player two, every even turn is of player one and every odd turn is of player two which is taken care of the modulo operator and this particular variable willing is to take care of whether the player wants to continue the game or he wants to quit it and when the player is willing and it is his turn to say this is his turn we pick a random movie create a question that is encode all the character with stars and spaces are left as spaces only, this is how the encoding as to be done. To create a question, print the question and then this will be the modified question for the first run that will be clear when we see this particular part and we have a variable to keep track of whether the user has said the answer or not said the answer, here the player has said or not said the answer so initially he has not said the answer so not said is true so as long as he did not say the answer continue it, you ask him to guess for a character if the character is present you have to unlock the character else you say the character is not found, that letter is present or not present based on that you take a decision, you say you have to unlock the character or you say that letter is not found and in unlocking process what you do is, you take the modified

version in the previous run, in first run it would be all letters encoded with stars, you refer to the actual movie name and unlock all those spaces where this particular character has been present, you unlock it that becomes your modified question print the modified question and once the modified question has been printed the user has two options he can guess the movie directly or he wants to unlock another letter, in case he wants to guess the movie, you say this is the you ask him to answer if that is the picked movie say that it is correct and you increase his points by one and you output him his score and since he has said the answer this particular value of not said should be made as false and yeah here there is a missing case as you could see in case he wants to guess the movie name what if it is wrong? It is not the correct answer. What should we do? That has to be handled so let’s say else that comes under else part that is his answer this is in column twenty five and this is also in column twenty five see indentation is important in python that’s why we are checking it see column twenty nine yah column twenty nine so in case if his guess is wrong, he wants to say that this is the movie name for example if you could take, for example you can take this two ‘drusyam’ and ‘nayakan’ these two are having same seven letters so based on seven letters he would have unlocked some character and he suppose has the feeling for example the letter y is common in both the things suppose he has unlocked the letter y he may feel that he could have answered something but what if that is not the correct answer so we need to inform that it is not the correct answer so please try again, try unlocking some more characters and try finding the movie, that part has to be taken care of, so let us print a message for that, print let me say wrong answer try again, try again ok so he had said that it’s a wrong answer so I am just asking him to try again so ok this part is taken care here now alright and in case if letter is not found we say letter is not found and once after he has said the movie name correctly you will intimate him his movie is correct and increase his points intimate his new score and said this particular value of not said to false because this is the variable we used to keep track whether the person has said the value or not said the answer or not as long as he has not said the correct answer this particular value will remain true and once he has said the answer this not said must become false you make it false and once not said becomes false the loop comes to an end so the game this particular turn is over so once it is over, you just ask him if he wants to continue or quit, in case he wants to, he wants to continue let him continue with the next thing in case he wants to quit you have to say this is the summary of the game till now you have to display his scores and give some nice greeting message and set this particular value of willing to false based on which we tracking whether the person wants to continue his game or he wants to quit the game so this particular thing you have to set it to false so this is how the game goes, this is for player one now let’s see the same thing will be there for player two as well so let me just simply copy paste it but please make sure that indentation is proper let me copy and I am posting it here and please make sure that the indentation is completely proper. So yeah we may not increment, we have to increment the value of the turn why? Because after this turn it will be the turn of next player in case he says he is not willing if someone says ‘I am not willing’, the game comes to an end there itself. If there are telling ‘I want to continue’ then the value of the turn will be incremented based on which the next player will get a turn see if you would see every value of turn if it is even number it will be the turn of player one for odd number it is a turn of player two we need to alternate the turns, that’s why we are increasing the turn value by one so initially you will get an even number

then an odd number then an even number then an odd number that is player one then player two then player one then player two and so on this is how the turns are being alternated alright this is the outline of the game if you could see this is the outline of the game so maybe you can pause here and just see what all has happen, how is the flow of the game is going on and there are something which has been not yet oh yeah here is the syntax error ok let me verify it I need to use the brackets that’s a syntax error. I print the question ok and yeah the same since even I have copy pasted the same error would have occurred so I am correcting this, here I would say there are some warnings occurring here, these names are undefined so let us define all these things in the next part of the video also maybe you can pause this, pause it here you can take a look at the flow of the game, you try to understand how it will goes and then in the next video everything will be clear once we have defined these undefined terminologies as well
GUESS THE MOVIE NAME 05
Alright guys in the previous video we had seen the outline of the game and the flow of the game how the flow would go this is how the game is played all this we had seen let’s give a very quick summary, we had collected a movies from imdb and we had inputted the two players name for personalisation purpose we had started with zero points each we had a variable to keep track of whose turn it is and we had a variable to keep track of whether they are willing to continue the game or not. And in the persons turn you have to display the that is his turn, pick a random movie from this list create the question that is encode all characters except by star print the question then as long as he says the answer you repeat this process you ask him to guess the letter whether it is present in the movie name, if it is present you need to unlock it else say that letter is not found, for unlocking what is that we are doing is, in that movie name if that particular letter is present that particular star is replaced by the actual letter and other letters just remains star this is how it happens, it happens repeatedly sometimes because with one character sometimes the person may able to guess the movie name in that case if he wants to guess the movie name, you get his answer check if it is the correct movie name, if it is correct display the message it is correct and increase his score by one point and say that this is your score and once he has said that it is correct this particular thing comes to an end, the thing of guessing the letter unlocking the letter these thing comes to an end. In case if he is wrong you have to ask him to try again and in case if he wants to unlock another character and he doesn’t want to have a guess, you need to repeat the same process again in this particular subsequent round of unlocking what you have to do is, the letter that is already unlocked must remain unlock only that shouldn’t be encoded by stars again so the thing that are noted know to the person is what encoded as stars so this is how the game goes and after he has given the answer ask him he wants to continue the game or quit based on that you act accordingly if he wants to quit say that this is the scores and this is the status till now and give him a good greeting message and say that you want to quit the game so just say willing is false where the games comes to an end, in case the person wants to continue what should be done is you should increment the value of turn as you could see here you could increment the value of turn so that the next player gets the chance to play, the thing continue this way you can continue the game on and on as long as not even one of them wants to quit the game, you can play the game on and on so here there are some things that are undefined you could see this one create question is present and unlock this three functionalities are not yet defined so let us define them one by one create question this is functionality that is not defined so let me define it so let me say here let me say I have to define the particular process of creating a question so let me say define this is the way you create a new function, this is creating a question is a function you want to be created so we will create this question based on a given movie there movie will be given here so based on a movie. You need to create a question alright so how do we do this? First let me capture the length of the movies let me say n let the movie contain n characters this included spaces as well please note that this length include spaces as well so for example if you would take this thing if you would take ‘golmaal’ movie there is three characters under space and four
 
character so it will be counted as eight characters so it is ‘golmaal’ has three characters space and four characters so it will be counted as eight characters so this is how the length of the movie will be counted so I need to calculate the length for this we have a pre defined function length, length of the movie that has been fast raved that is for which movie you want to create a question get its length and for encoding we need to process the individual characters if it is a space you should remain you should keep it as a space only otherwise you should make it a star so we have to process has individual characters so to get individual characters what you do is maybe you can say may be I will say letters, let me say the letters is the list I am creating out of this movie name list of movie, movie is a string that is this as a single word will be passed so that would be decomposed into individual letters by this functionality list so that letters would be a list. We will have now also create a new temporary list may be I will call it as temp that will be used later we will come to know what is the purpose why we are creating this new list because we need to output the encoded format so the encoded format based on individual character I will have it has a list and then I will join it to a single string that is how I am going to do it so let me do that, so we have to hydrate over that is we will move over every character every letter of the movie name so that is present every letter is present in this list letters so I have to move over this for I let me have a variable most over I in the range of how many letters are there? That is captured by this value n which shows the length which calculated the length range of n ok right? if what we should check, if that is space I should just keep it as a space otherwise I should make it a star so let me say that is found in letters if letters at this position I is equal to space then to this temporary array to the output array I have to append that is I have to add at the end, end of the current list I have to add a space else if it is not a space I have to add a, add the same character, I have to add the character star so every letter is encoded by star except this face that is taken care of here if it is a space you append a space else you append a star that’s what you have done now your temporary array contains the encoded form of your temporary list contains the encoded form of your movie which is nothing but your question you call that as your question so you need to return it but your question is a single word not a list so you need to make it a single word for that we have a built in functionality called join, so let’s make use of it and we will join it so let me call it as may be let me say it is a question is nothing but irrespective of any character just keep joining, just keep joining every letter you convert the letter into a string format because string format it is easier you to join so you are converting into string format for every letter x in the temp, so how this works, let me once again say this temp is the array which has, temp is the list which has the stars and spaces with respect to the chosen movie name so say for example if our movie name is ‘golmaal’ then with respect to g the star is appended then with respect to o the star is appended with respected to l the star is appended here is a space so space is appended then star, star, star, star this is how you have encoded and you have it has a individual character for each of the individual character you convert it to a string and keep joining into one composite string that is as one question so this I don’t want it as a list of eight characters but, I want it as one string of eight characters that is how one word of eight characters something like that I want, so that is what I am doing by this join function so I have created this question so let me return the question that’s it create question no words, if you would see here then you would say create question what you do is you calculate the length of the movie you convert it into individual characters the list of individual characters

because based on the characters you have to append that is if it is a space you just keep it as a space that’s what is taken care of here if it is a space then keep it as the space itself else you have to put a star and then now from the list you merge back and get back the original string, get back as a string that is a question so you get back the question you return that question that is instead of having a list of some characters you merge those single individual characters and make it as a single string and return that single string that is what we are doing here with the help of the join functionality all these are pre defined functionalities alright so create question part is over so sorry this is picked movie sorry for this picked movie, its picked movie given that I have copied pasted even here I am sorry this is picked movie not pick alright ok so now the warning occur at is present define name is present and undefined name unlocked so we will define them slowly so let us define that, define so let me a single functionality is not define is present is present so what are the characters what are the things I have passed one letter and a movie so I have to see if this particular letter is present in the movie name so this is what I have to check in this functionality so let me say I will have a counter, so for this what do I do is my logic is I will count the number of occurrences of the letter and this movie there is a functionality pre defined functionality for strings to count the number of occurrences of characters say for example my name vidya, if I want to count the number of occurrences of letter a in vidya I have a functionality if I pass vidya and a to it I would get back one as the answer because letter a occurs once in string vidya in case if I would give the input as t, letter t is not present in vidya so it would output zero so it would return back the answer as zero because this occurrence of t, that is letter t occurs zero times in the word vidya where as the letter a occurs one time in the word vidya, if it occurs multiple time may be if you could take some may be you take from the same movie itself say ‘dangal’ letter a occurs two time so it will return two so if the letter is present it will return non zero value that is some positive value if it is not present that function will return a zero value, if the value is zero then the letter is not present that is the logic we are going to use say we are making use of the pre defined functionality of strings ok so I need to get the count so let me get the count so let us say c for count equals to movie dot count that’s it this is the functionality count of letter so this particular functionality will count how many times this letter occurs in that movie name so it will count if this value of c is equal to zero that means that letter is not present so is present this what you are asking if the if that is present so given that it is zero it means it is not present so you have to return false return false sorry false else what should be the case? It should return true I guess this is quite intuitive only thing that we are using is this is the pre defined functionality count that counts the number of occurrences of the particular letter in the movie so if the movie doesn’t contain that letter then it will return zero which will say that false for which we are returning false that is this letter is not present in that movie name or else we will say it is present so is present functionality has been find so if we could see the warnings are disappear the warnings are disappeared so here only warning that is still there is unlocked so we need to define this, let us do it or maybe you can pause here for some time just see to the flow once, once again and now we have defined this two new functionalities you would, you may even see to the flow and pause it in that particular point where this functionality is being called you trace what is happening how things were done just trace it for clear and understanding so maybe, I would recommend you guys pause here understand the flow completely and then proceed, now comes the unlocking

part we will do it so before going to the unlocking part please do make sure that you have understood the flow till here. Alright I hope you guys have paused and understood the flow till here let us get with unlocking part define unlock? For unlocking what are all the things I am having the modified question let me call it question itself here it doesn’t matter and then you have a movie name that is the picked movie name you have passed that you have passed then the particular letter alright oh here it is letter than I am sorry for this, this is letter because we are not using the term character, character is the technical term that generally being used in the computer science for letter, letter is a intuitive term for anyone who knows English, so its better if we use letter itself so here also its letter sorry for this confusion ok so far so good, so we have requesting that is the status till now that is how many letters have been unlocked or nothing has been unlocked all letters will be encoded as stars and spaces will remain as spaces if something as been opened then that particular letter will be visible others will be encoded as star and the spaces will remain as spaces so the movie will contain the actual movie name and the letter which the person wants to unlock that is this will in this case note that it will never happen that letter is not present because here itself we are making a change if the letter is present only then we are getting into the uncloaking part if it is not present we just say that it is not present so here that particular thing you need not worry about what if the letter is not present what will I unlock if you need not worry about it the letter will be definitely present. Ok so I need to process character wise so similar to how we did create question part we will break the string into list of characters that is what we will be doing now, we are going to refer to this movie so let me call it as reference, reference list, list of movie ok then I want the question list as well so let me call it as question list or may be ql for short anything but it’s not a problem we can have that is question list, the question list is the list of the question, question is nothing but the status till now how many characters are under has been known to the player and how much has been not untracked so this is the question basically here and same like that for output say we will have a temporary list, if you could understand the create question part well this would be easier for you so that’s why I had recommended that you guys please do pause and take a look at it in case you feel again you need to take a look at it it’s never a problem you can pause here take a look at it you understand that really well then now proceed here alright so, I believe you guys are now very clear with all the parts, so let’s proceed similarly, I would find the number of characters in the movie that is determine using the pre defined functionality like number of characters in the movie. So let me iterate in the similar way for I in range of n so for each of that what should I do, if the particular character in this reference list is the actual letter or if it is a space you have to append the space only else you have to append the stars or the characters that is already there as per the scenario so let us do it. Let us first have it if letter in the movie actual movie name if the letter is equal to sorry space or if that letter is equal to the letter that you had asked what should you do? You should append the actual letter to the output; you should add the actual letter to the output. Why do we do that? If it is a space or if it is desired letter in that particular position see for example may be ‘anand’ is the movie that is been picked and a is the letter they are seeking for at the first position the letter is a which is the desired letter so in that case I should reference that list I should move to that list and take that particular character and append it to my output, so my output are also showing, a is the letter by player is seeking to unlock an a is present in that position so a has to be appended in the output. Else

if it is none of them else what should I do? I should check whether this particular question list has star in it in this position or it is not star that mean say for example the same movie anand in the first iteration probably the person has unlocked a and he wants to unlock d now let us just assume he wants to unlock d so what is the thing that noticed, so our letter now we want to unlock is d and the question is a star a star, star and movie is anand this is what is pass to us so the reference list will contain anand in single characters a list of single characters the question will still contain a star a star, star as a list of characters and this is our output list and we have taken the length and it is this reference list at this position is not a space also it is not equal to our letter d so it will come to the else part so you have to check so he wants to unravel d it shouldn’t be the case that you should give him star, star, star, star d you should give him a star a star, that should be the output right so you have to check whether the question list has star or some other character that is that character might have been unravel during the previous runs so you have to check it so let me check it if the question list at that particular position contains star, if that is containing star then you append star then you append a star else what you do? Sorry it’s a spelling mistake append ok and here it is else you append the actual character sorry, sorry it’s again a spelling mistake append the actual character where is the actual character present? It is present actually in both the places in this reference list as well as the question list because during the previous run of unravelling also you would have referred to the reference list and unravel so you can use any of the two question list of I or reference list of I that is ith position of question list or the reference list you can use any of them. Let me use reference list, reference list of I so I have appended it ok so in a similar fashion so now given that I have iterated in this would be done for all the characters all the letter of the movie given that we have completed now we have we would have got the output list as a list of characters we want it as a single string so similar to our previous operation we would do a join functionality so let me say this is my let me say this I will copy, this is what I am basically precisely doing this way I am copying and pasting it so question is already given so let us say this as question new just for clarity sake I am saying this is question new, new question we got and now return the new question so whatever we have done is almost very much similar to what is done in the create question part so if you could understand that there you can definitely understand it what you need to take care is if it is space or if it is required character then you append the required character else you see if it is star that is it has been not unravelled the previous run then you append a star else you append a actual character here you could use reference of I or question list of I as well anything can be used because during the previous runs of unravelling as well you would have referred to the reference list and you would have followed the same procedure so it doesn’t matter both will actually be the same value you could use any value and then now we are joining the output list into a single string and we are returning that string this is how unlocking works alright? Now may be you can pause and have a look at the entire code how things go on, how everything works, you just have a look at it, let’s run this in the next video.
GUESS THE MOVIE NAME 06
Alright, in the previous video we have seen the various parts of the code we had seen the play method and the various other sub methods it is using so let us just have a very quick recap of it, we had collected the list of movies from the imdb site we had inputted the two players name and we had started off with zero points each, we had different variables like turn and willing as the name suggest it make sure that turn is alternated the game goes when both are willing to play even if one person is not willing to play game comes to an end and to alternate the turns we are making use of this mode operator and during each turn of the person you need to randomly you pick a movie and create a question how question works here, if you could see create question what it does is it splits it to the individual characters it sees if the individual letters it sees if the letters is a space you just keep it as a space some other letter other than space you encode it as star. So this is how question has been created and once question has been created question is displayed to hum and the player is asked to asked to guess the character guess a letter guess a letter that is present in the movie name so he has to guess the letter, once he has given the letter once you first check the letter is present in the movie name or not so to check if it is present in the movie name we are making use of a built in functionality count that will say how many times this letter has occurred in the particular word so movie is our word in that movie how many times this letter has occurred, if it has not at all occurred it will return zero otherwise it will return a non zero positive value so if it is retuning a zero you say it is false that is it is not present is present while we are playing is false otherwise it is true so that’s how we are returning the false and true values correspondingly and if it is not present you say that this letter is not found if it is present you have to unlock the unlock the letters, so for unlocking what do you do? You do something very similar to that what we are done in create question we open the sting into list of letters you open the string in the list of characters and based on the each character if it is a space or that actual letter which he has wanted to unlock you append that letter into the output string otherwise if it is not unlocked yet so and this is not that letter as well then you have to append star else you have to append letter that has been unlocked till now this is how we have created the output list now we merge the individual characters of the output list into a single string and return that single string so this is how unlocking has been done once unlocking has been done you print the unlock version and based on that the user can take two decisions either he can guess the name of the movie or he can unlock another character if he wants to unlock another character the same process is repeated if he wants to guess the movie name you ask him to answer check if it is correct, if it is correct say that he has said the correct answer and increase his points by one and show him his points and once he has said the correct answer this particular thing of asking for a character unlocking guessing all this come to an end so this is how the movie goes sorry this is how the game goes and this once he had said the answer what should you do is, you should ask him if he wants to continue the game or not if he wants to continue let him play that is then the value of then the if you say he wants to continue then the value of turn is increased by one in order to fascinated the next player to play the game in case he wants to quit then the game totally comes to an end before ending
 
the game you show the status greet them well and then you end the game this is how the play goes ok before starting it running of the code I would like to just say something here if you would see I have typed as with hint these are all some machine independencies may be some operating system independencies in some cases it may happen that you need to type it as or in some system Linux based system I have used you need to use the function raw input for string and input for the other data types these are some few decencies you can always all ways look it up to what is the problem online and you can fix it please say some independencies on Mac os so I had rectified them this is very trivial just I am type it as string it into if some of you have already familiar with java or heard of java even java works like this takes all input by default as string so we need to convert it into the type whatever we need here we know that the input is either one two something like that its a number so I am typecasting it as a loop so this is just a few independencies so for a Mac this is not independencies for Mac os for Linux os one independencies I observed was it takes two functions raw input and input so you can look it up depends on may be for windows there may be some independencies you can always look it up in case if something doesn’t work you can always look it up, you can see as to what is an solution, you have lot of solution available online on stack overflow there are many such sites where people generally post their problems and there are many who help with solutions to all these this purely managed by people it’s amazing you get good response there and if you know some answers if you contribute that is different feeling that is different kind of feeling proud feeling you would get I would recommend that you guys be a part of such community where you can interact with your fellow programmers and you gain more knowledge as you would generally would have heard pier knowledge is something that is uncomparable to other types of knowledge, even in your college the study time college or school events you could remember you would have done a group study those memories are something those things are something that as no match for it so it is always the case that clear learning has a very good advantages associated with it so one such clear learning clear learning thing for programming is this thing stack overflow or such online platforms you can always look up to it may be you can try reading through solutions already presenting can gain more knowledge and you can also contribute if you know something there is website for almost everything for hose not from computer science background as well stack exchange has got lot of websites you can see to it may be you would have seen through it already if not also please be a part of such community so where you actively discuss about the current happenings of your field and you stay updated with it so this is I am just telling this so that you guys can be a part of this amazing community where you stay updated with what happenings in your field that’s it this thing I had just looked up and I had included it nothing now let’s run the program. Ok player one please enter your name ok if he enter let me say abc player two please enter your name let me say xyz ok some characters are there one two three four five six seven eight, eight characters without any spaces so I am not able to guess what is the movie so let me play smartly, it is generally a practice that they you usually unlock vowels you try with all vowels then why this is generally a practice in almost any movie name you see you would have this letter occurrences almost all the time almost all the time so this is general a practice so I will start with a so a is present only once so this is unlocked ok and maybe, I want to unlock another character I would unlock e, e is not found ok let me unlock i, yeah I is found let me unlock

another character o, o is not found u, u is not found y not found, yeah I guess now I know the movie name let me guess it ‘drishyam’ correct? We will see your score one which says no I want to continue or quit let me continue alright oh this is the problem we had to make the small rectification then everything will work good, let us do it very quickly see I have not change the name here its p two its player twos turn I had copy pasted I had missed changing the name so let us do it very quickly so this is how it happens actually you run and by then something unexpected comes then you come to know that oh I skipped it, this is how the programming happens so in case you are making mistakes please never get disheartened all these is learning process failures are the stepping stones for success they say this is very much true in case of programming through lot of mistakes only you come to know what ever is the correct way t two I have to change here and yeah somewhere else yeah here I have to change same lines so ok somewhere else I have to change, do I have to change anywhere else no I guess yeah fine alright let me save let me open a new console letter let me open fresh console and let me run it run ok player one abc player two xyz your turn someone two three four five six seven eight, eight characters let me guess a I am lucky that I am probably getting the same movie let me unlock another I get I yeah I got the same movie let me guess now its drishyam correct? So let me continue xyz your turn one two three four five six seven eight all this is probable actually because we are randomly picking a movie that’s it so it may be the case that both the players get the same thing this is highly lesser the probability but if you want to make it still the least, you want to decrease the probability that both the people get the same movie name you increase the number of movies in the list that is what just here we have ten movies because we were not interested in scrolling through the imdb list our aim here is to learn the programming part and not to watch movies so I just had to pick some ten movies from imdb maybe if you would pick more movies there were two fifty movies they were displayed there if you would pick some hundred movies two hundred movies this probability that the both people get the same thing is very rare so maybe I hope next time I will get some other movie yeah I am getting some other movie so let me say with my letter ‘a’ these are the things so let me unlock another letter ‘e’ yeah now I am I guess now I am able to guess the movie see with vowels you are able to guess the movie very quickly ‘taare zameen par’ so wontedly let me say without spaces I want to check if it will works fine wrong answer! See this not excepting the movie name contains spaces so you have to give spaces it doesn’t except the other way perfect! So I have to again say some letter so let me say ‘r’ even that I know that this is the movie name say ‘r’ ok so it is unlocked so I have to guess the movie name this time properly with spaces I will give ‘taare zameen par’ ok yeah abc your score is two and I want to continue xyz one two three four five six seven eight oh this xyz must be very lucky person he is getting the same thing this is this occurs because we have a very less number of movies, if you increase the number of movies in the list you will get a better random a better choices every time yeah fine continue again I am getting the same wow ok oh its some different movie alright see I was saying the same movie again and again and I was thinking this is same movie no this is different movie so I am I don’t know the answer what would I do? Ok let me give my same answer it will anyways it’s a wrong answer let’s see yeah I have to try again with some other letter ok a e I o u y alright now I know the movie now let me write ‘nayakan’ sorry I should say that I want to guess the movie then I will so ok I will write ‘nayakan’ perfect! Now, I want to quit let me press zero see I am

greeted, abc your scores is this, xyz your score is this and I am greeted alright this is how the program output had appeared and this is how the game was played, you would have seen in that and during the run off the game one thing you would have noticed this sometimes one movie got repeated often some movie may get repeated often this is usually a case even when we play manually right? see suppose assume that you are playing same game for some one hour two hour something like that then sometimes it may happen that you forget that you had all already set the movie name you already asked that as a question and you may pose the same question again it happens, the same thing happens with the computer as well, computer how does it does? It has a list of movies it picks a movie name randomly it’s purely a probability so we can never guarantee that you will never get a repetition that is in case for example say the movie ‘dangal’ if it has been picked I never give you a guarantee that again ‘dangal’ will never be free so that we can never guarantee in this randomly picking method because for this repetition to occur the probability associated the math behind it and the probability is not zero probability it is not a zero probability there is some minimal probability with which this repetition can occur, it is evidently visible because we have only ten movies in our list, in case if you increase the number of movies if you have some hundred movies in the list this probability of repetition is very, very less and you it is not very evident that there is a repetition but there will be repetition the probability of it is non zero so that there may be repetitions may occur there, you can never guarantee that repetitions would never occur so may be for that you can think of some strategies can you think of some other way other than randomly picking from a list can you pick the movies such that repetitions will never occur can you pick the movie from the list from some other method you can brain storm with lot of various methods as well, as well as to implement this, this is not the only way there are many ways by which you can implement the same thing you can come up with the variants in the implementation we have done you can probably make this particular thing we had copy pasted for player one and player two right you can make this particular thing as a sub function and you just make it as a single function or instead of making this many lines so that is your you making this as a single function and reusing the same function when needed you can do that, that is one of the improvisation you can do with this implementation and as good as a lot can be done, this is not the one standard way there are many ways also for the game there are many standard variants may be you can have some constraints like maximum ten guesses, if allowed more than you cannot you cannot allow the person to guess something like that, you can have constraints and may be you can vary the points based on in which guess he gets his right you can vary the points in, you can do anything per imagination sky is the limit you can do a lot of variants you can go on and on you can you can come up with many different implementations you would you would you can even create some brand new game with this as well with the different variants set up as I had said with different incentives schemes with different points and you can have a any number of any type of game you can create with this. So I would recommend that you guys do give some thoughts over it come up with your own variants do discuss that in the discussion form and as I had said in this video itself clear learning is something that is that has no match, so I would recommend that you guys please discuss in the discussion form and faster clear learning you also enrich your knowledge as well so thanks for watching the video till now please do take part in the discussion form please discuss your variants your different strategies of implementation or

any idea regarding this you have got you can please do discuss that in the discussion form thanks for watching till now have a nice day.
