Introduction To Programming
Welcome to the NPTEL course, ‘The joy of computing”. I plan to start with the very informal session with the couple of my friends sitting here, ravikiran and sowjanya, maybe we should say hi to everyone. So I have handpicked a couple of my students who know little about programming and I would like to see how I can teach them the joy of computing. So initially this session will be more of asking questions and then answering, mostly asking questions from your side and I will try to answer at my best ok? So why are you people here firstly? Basically I want to learn programming. Right, have you tried learning programming before any time? I just tried but it seem to be really difficult sort of. So difficult hasn’t you have tried programming and you found it extremely harder task to program is it? Or is it that you find it disinteresting? It is interesting but there is a notion that programming is difficult so there is that clear in us that programming is difficult so. That’s true many people find programming is very difficult any particular reason why you think programming is difficult? Because the teacher who taught me was directly started that “rules should be followed” and the actual procedure there was no joy or there was no fun in it. Right, so have you used programming anywhere, let’s say you had a real life situation and u felt the need to write a piece of code and then validate it and verify it or have you used programming anywhere outside your curriculum, let’s say apart from course on programming huh first course on programming I am sure these days high school have, high scholars learn programming right very basic stuff and given that you people have mathematics background off course you would have learned some packages software and even programming for that matter so outside your curriculum have u tried learning something? Not really. Have you felt the need to oh here is a place where I think I should get to my desk try to write a piece of code and then to see what’s the output, has that happened ever? No I have never felt the need or urge to. So the course will actually be full of that in fact we will be giving you, ok we will clear ting occasion to feel the in need to go write a piece of coded and then see what would be the output. Right? And most of the course will be simply trying to mimic a game, stimulate a game and then try to play with each other on the computer right. Heard of rock, paper scissors. Yeah so we have seen where couple of people will be playing, rock paper scissors and then person feels the need to write the computer program for it. And there are many more instances where we create that desire in you to see, if this can be programmed and seen right?
Why Programming?
One of these questions that many people have is why do we even programmed? Right? What is the need for it? U seems the digital world most of what you see on your cell phone on your computers or be it on the internet webpage all of these are the in fact some programs. Someone should have written a piece of code for all these things tats it if I can tell you in one sentence what is programming? It’s about getting things done really really fast right? You can always ask me this question can we replace? Can we do without computers? Can we do without any of these programming? Off course yes we can. The point is it makes us life really really really simple, it makes it really fast and nice for you to execute a piece of talk for example If you where to go to your huh train reservation system right? And see when exactly you had travelled from this location to this location. It’s very easy for you to put a search query inside your reservation website and see where all you have travelled. Otherwise you should maintain a big log of where you go what you have done and then you may have to search through it manually. Let’s say for instance I am travelling from Delhi to bang lore ok, what do I do? I go to the railway station ensure that the my name is there on the chart board the train and my friend is checking whether the train has started on time or not so that he knows it reaches on time and he can even trace where the exactly my train is. And has I am having my journey I open YouTube and then I can watch a good video may be good movie, right? And then I can send a couple of emails to my friends and then I reach Bangalore after reaching Bangalore, I open my cell phone and then try booking a taxi through the popular application. Right? And then I reach back home and pay the taxi person the money that my phone tells me to pay. You see the entire thing from boarding my train until reaching my home I have been using applications all of them not even excluding one all of them are bits and pieces of programming. A whole lot of programming the whole of digital world is of been made of these programming only and the atomic blocks of it how exactly do we go about getting programming done is what we will be initiating you all with. So you mean to say every step of our life every day every minute some where we are using programs? Almost every where we are using it today I can say because you see, you got to a shop and you do online transfer pay it though your favourite application to the shop keeper in fact every shop keeper these days they have one application or the other through which you can transfer money to them right? So we can hardly imagine a life today without digital way of handling things let’s say we pay money or we getting Amazon getting your favourite product delivered through Amazon it all involves the digital world and by digital world that’s the system what happens in this world is the whole lot of code, whole lot of programs where in you precisely tell a computer what to do what not to do how to handle exceptions and things like that.
PROGRAMMING FOR EVERYBODY
What all you said all of those really amazing which fascinates me that by using programming so much but I know little of it so. Do u think anybody can learn it? So that’s a good question, this is the frequently asked questions that can I learn programming? I would say programming is the actually quiet common seneschal. But there is one problem that a student faces majorly that is a whole lot of discouragement so it’s like if you come and tell me you want to learn French and I start of giving you literature in French, that you obviously will be discouraged. First point, second point is when you have someone around you who is doing really well with programming that’s the second form of discouragement, That’s the huge form of discouragement that you should be there is a popular tip for chess players when you want to learn chess you should not play with a champion, you should play with someone who is like you may be slightly better but not a lot better right? So second discouraging factor for someone to learn programming is that they end a felling extremely discourage by looking at someone who does really well. First one is whole lot of details we start with some complicated stage of programming we don’t start from scratch, secondly people around you sort of discourage you and put you off. A one word answer to your question is YES in fact any one can program and it’s fairly easy process. So can you ball juggle? If I give you three balls can u juggle? It’s quite difficult. It’s quite difficult. Right? But you see in about a week or two weeks time anyone can learn ball juggling it’s all a matter of practice so programming is also that it is in fact much much easier then learning a new language and its very very common seneschal so in this course what we will be doing is we will be ensuring that we start from something that is not programming but it is a lot of fun to do and then slowly introduce you all to python programming right? Again not through whole lot of details and the do’s and don’ts for programmers but we what we will be doing is will be making you solve a problem and then learn a concept in programming. I think this is the fun way to learn programming than learning the old school way of reading a entire book on a programming language and trying to do everything parallel and not knowing why is this even used and how to go about doing this and what not exercise problems that you don’t understand things like that, so the whole of this course will mostly be focused on, you pick a question, you try to answer it and while you are answering it you will be learning a concept.
Any Prerequisites
Do I need to know something else pre-requisites? Ok. There is absolutely no pre-requisites assumed for the course, all you need to know is you must understand what I talk tats the only pre-requisite, some amount of computer handling, let’s say if u know how to handle your key board and if you know how to click on something and open what is called a python terminal that should be more than enough. Right? If you just follow our instructions you should be able to do that.
Where To Start?
I have heard people telling that computer has some languages? People understand only certain set of rules and like also heard that something called C, C++. But I don’t really know where to start because some say for this you know, you have to know this. And some say for this u have to know something else so I don’t really know where to start programming? Yes there is a huge confusion for a beginner. Where to start? What to do and things like that. You see talk about programming language people talk to you about python, C, C++, what not right? So let me tell you something, most of these things have one thing in common and that is to understand what programming logic is. Right? There are some three to four most important skills that one must develop. That should be more than enough. Once you develop that you in fact can converse in its like the art of articulation, if you know how to talk well after learning a language I am sure you can do well in that language. Ok? Learning many languages is different from the art of articulation so the art of articulation analogously translates to understanding what is called the programming logic. You will see more of it during the run offer course let me tell you that it doesn’t really matter which programming language you learn. What matters is to understand how to think like a computer scientist by that I mean how to ensure that your brain can actually think how to solve piece of problem using programming. For that I would strongly suggest that you people go by the course, the course is going to assume nothing but we will be teaching python. Python is considered to be a very easy and quick language to learn at the same time extremely powerful. Right!
Why Do We Have So Many Languages?
I have one more question, why do you have so many languages? Why can’t you have just one universal language? Or is it necessary to have so many languages? So this questions answer is slightly tricky that even I don’t think even I know the right answer for this question, but if I ready to ask u the same question why do you have so many languages in the world people speak right? You have look at our country like India we have so many languages and let alone that dialects 100’s of them, right. So the reason is some people find so laze and comfort in getting a few tasks done using a particular type of programming language and it develops with time. Then they realize, ok if this kind of programming language is used for, let’s say for scientific purposes only it is not helping us in building any business application and then they switch to a customize programming language and say, so this we will use for business oriented applications, for example Pascal was a general purpose programming language, Fulton, I am talking about 30-40 years ago ‘Fulton’ its stands for formula translator ok? That was mainly used for scientific reasons and then came ‘COBOL’, ‘COBOL’ was used for common business oriented language that’s what It stands for, it was used for business oriented applications. And then they thought ok fine we need something really rob stand nice and then they came out with C and then they realize in C there was lot of problem s when a programmer was programming, it was not easy on his mind so they created this notion of objects and that was the birth of object oriented programming. Right, there is very good difference between C and C++. C++ helps a person program better by keeping his mind free from any sort of ambiguity and confusions when he is coding. And then came python because python was known to be sort of they kept in mind the physiology of program. C to C++ are big leap then the python was like everyone should program, how do we go about doing that and then since its open for lot of people contributed to it and today its stand really tall as a fantastic programming language. So it is all evolution of mans thinking based on the need for something, that’s the good question by the way. Yeah was slightly thinking as you said it was evolved to us that what I can generalize from what you have told now, so do you think it will further evolve will be further move ahead or.. that’s again a very interesting question again I am not so sure whether I know the answer off course yes I personally believe that next generation will one thing is for sure I have been observing the programming is getting easier and easier with time. Firstly because of the available online resources, secondly because of the inherent ease with which you can code with the kind of tools and techniques available today. For example I am not sound little technical don’t mind there is something called integrated development environments IDES where it makes your life really simple to write a piece of, it’s like you are talking in some language if you make a mistake you have a earphone small earphone where you hear you made a mistake here you correct it. Or you are typing something and you make a typing mistake and your word processor says this is the right spelling not just that it corrects it automatically or says there is a possible grammar error here I am just giving you analogies right, even in programming there are such beautiful what is called IDEs which helps you program really really better to the future of programming would be any one can program any amount of it and with the whole lot of confidence and the
 
skill set require for one to program back in 80’s is very different from what it is today in fact there are software’s called scratch a very popular one which I am going to teach you people to begin with you will see the actually fun to program it’s a whole lot of fun to program in fact you can develop a games of your choice by using tool called scratch. Will see more of it.
How To Go About Programming
So you have told us that programming has evolved to be very easier these days, so can you tell us how we will be leaning or how we go about programming in this course? So in this course, we are going to start from scratch. By scratch I mean absolutely nothing. We only assume that you know how to use your mouse and your keyboard that’s it ok and from there we are going to go ahead and teach you almost everything of what one is supposed to know in programming right? At the end of the course you will be ready to call yourself a programmer and you can actually start programming some non tribunal things. So you mean to say after twelve weeks of the course I will be really ah knowing all the requirements of requirements to write a piece of code. See this I should, I should probably take a pause and then I should make you all realise that programming is a whole lot of practice. It is probably, it has two steps, one is you need some motivation to programme, that the course is giving you in abundance. No doubts about it, secondly you need to do a whole lot of practice, practice comes with, you should be inspired, you should be some sort of self motivation, you should sit with your friends and then talk to them and then see if there is something that you can take up as a challenge and then write a piece of code and then see the output that is something that we should gradually cultivate right? With time. This is more like singing, you see I mean you cannot become a fantastic famous singer over a night; it involves a whole lot of practice, a whole lot of thinking, a whole lot of culturing of your voice and things like that. Programming is exactly that. In this connection I must tell you something that there are many people who give up on programming thinking that it is not for them and I must tell you all something that to the best of what I have seen to the best of what is known already, programming is quite straight forward and comes with just few hours of practice but a huge deterrent for a programming is the de motivation which generally emanates from your surroundings or your inability to solve something and things like that. So what you must do is go in baby steps, don’t try to do something very complicated in the beginning of your leaning of the programming, go in baby steps and go as much as possible and talk to a whole lot of people, and off course as in always keep trying. Right? Nothing like it. Ahh you said about programming and how we go about it, how can mathematician make use of it? Even I am from math background. So you are from mathematics background, be it math, chemistry, economics, physics you name it. Today there is a requirement for all of us to calculate things to analyze things, right? Something as non trivial as how much water you intake every day? Right? What is your, what is the change in weight from the past three four years of an individual ok? What is the amount of carbohydrates that you take? Protein that you take? Can can have something to say about your health. To analyze this kind of data and to infer something you need programming so you see an nutrition specialist requires programming, see all though you have packages which can be used to get all these things done, you must keep in your mind that this packages have a programme inbuilt, because of which the package works and it sometimes helps for you to understand how to programme so that you can customize whatever you need to do as per your requirements. So i would say
 
programming is definitely not a must for everyone but is a great add on to your skill no matter what you are doing and no matter what background you hale from.
Why To Learn Programming?
Now a day you have applications apps for everything. You have websites for everything, you name it you have it, so why do you think we have to learn something about that because now a day we have for all the utility you get something, you have applications. Again a good question. So you see the fact that there are so many buildings isn’t a reason why you cannot have a new building? Right! The fact that you have so many buildings doesn’t stop you from understanding how buildings are made. May be you may want to go one floor up of an existing building. Right! So if you understand how one can programme? There are a whole lot of situations where you will feel something is missing here and I can go on and do add on to it, right? That can happen if you know the background programming that they have used. See it’s not an absolute must for everyone to know programming. But you to have an edge in your respective subject programming is a must. Be it you said you are from mathematics background, physics background, economics, assume you are doing business a small scale business still knowing how to write a piece of code and get things done comes a long way in helping you to have that extra edge over others. Right! Forget others to do something that is out of the box and out of the knob, you need to understand how to programming, programming is one skill that helps you get things done really really fast, I am doing to illustrate this very soon with you people by using test cases, where you will realise that without programming you cannot imagine getting o things done.
What Is Programming?
So I will give you a quick illustration on what is programming? Ok. I am going to programme you people right now, ok. Look at this, I am going to show you my hand, if I show you in this hand, if I say this it means coffee, if I say this two it means tea ,this is water. Can we play this game now? Yeah yeah. Coffee! Water, Tea, water, coffee, tea, water. Ok. Let me add a two more items to it. Coffee, tea, water, juice, cookies. Can you remember? Yeah. Tea, tea, water, juice, cookies, Water, cookies, juice, tea, he is copying. Ah! Juice, cookies, tea, ok. So let’s add a small variant to this. You see what happened? I told them to make these assignments for these symbols and they did the assignment. As I was showing them this numbers they could easily say what they represent. How about this? I will show the item using these fingers, whatever coffee, tea, water, juice, cookie and in this hand I will show the number of coffee that I want, number of coffee cups basically. If I say this, it means three cups of coffee, If I do this, quick! Five cookies perfect! Shall we go ahead? Three cops of water, three cups of water. I think he has not quoted right, let him do it, you remain silent ok? Oye! I can’t see from this side. Two cups of juice, yeah! Two cups of juice where you took some time for me to figure out ok! What is this? Four cups of tea, Very nice. One cup of tea, one cup of coffee, four cups of juice, two cups of!!Two cookies, two cookies and so on. So what I just now did is like I programmed their minds to follow a particular code line of thought and then they could figure out what I mean by this. What I meant by this and things like that. So whenever I show this to sowjanya it means help me with two cups of tea, I am sorry four cups of tea. If I say this it means help me with two cookies. Correct! So on and so for so symbolically we can represent an item with something and I just programmed their minds to follow a particular rule. Right? Ok. Probably you wondering what has this to do with the programming? I am just trying to get your minds started on what one means by giving instructions. Programming is all about that.
How To Give Instructions
So let’s do one thing, so you all know the age old way of doing a paper boat, observe carefully. How is a paper boat done? We take a sheet of paper ok? A very clear to you people from this angle but i am sure most of u already knows how to make a paper boat. Now imagine these two people are robots! They know nothing. Do you know how to make a paper boat? Probably not! No! Correct good. So I will teach you step by step, you follow exactly what I do. Firstly this is a rectangle, this is a rectangle right? I wish to make a square out of it, how do i do that? Just follow whatever I am doing, we can keep it here. May be you can tear this, all that we did was we made this rectangle, a square. Right? By crossing it like this and that’s the way you make a square. Right? And simply do whatever I am gonna tell you people. Collect all the papers here, look at this, fold it once like this and fold it again like this, simple ok. Show it to everyone so that they can see what we are doing and then you see what’s happening here, off course I am not going to teach you how to make a boat in this course but I am trying to tell you people that we give instructions and people follow and we get things done. Ok let’s go ahead now fold this like this take one leaf of this and fold it like this and the rest three leafs will be folded on the other side. This reminds me of my school days! So then u knew how to make a boat is it? No they never taught you, rarely I remember ok! Ok. Good. So what you do is you can you should fold it like this basically you should put your finger inside and fold it like this and you will get something like form of a kite and then pluck this out, pluck this out like this and you will get a boat. Tada! Done? all of you, what is it that I did just now? I instructed a couple of people here on how to make a boat and here we have three boats. Correct? so similarly we probably can now make a plane out of paper or any origami art, I do it, I give instructions step by step and you also do it. If you fail to understand my steps you will not be able to get the boat as simple as that. So! Not the exact boat, u may get the some other shape or u may not end up u might end up u might end up not getting a boat finally! Right? So what if we get stuck in middle and it’s not opening it at all, you force it open it will tear ha ha ha, you will be tearing a sheet right? So the point I am trying to make is by following a set of instructions he accomplishes something that I ask him to accomplish, similarly your computer can actually understand your instructions, when you instruct the right way. Imagine i instruct! I tried giving this instruction in Telugu or Kannada or French or Italian or some other language which you don’t understand, you will not able to accomplish it or if there are any ambiguity in the instruction you will not be able to accomplish it. Right? So what is important here is to talk and give instruction in a way that whether it’s a computer or a human being you are instructing in a way that the other end the computer understand what you are instructing. Right! Any questions? We didn’t discuss anything to have questions oh go ahead! I will just sum up so just told that whatever instructions we give for the other person it must be very clear, crystal clear. Clear, ambiguous, is it to follow and he must be able to produce whatever you are trying to ask him to produce him or her? Right? Ok so this way we actually make a computer listen to you, take your instructions and then accomplish it and computers have a capability of accomplishing something really really fast right.
 
