NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING: AUTHOR STYLOMETRY
Guess what? Today is my birthday and I got this pack of letters written anonymously by my friends, will now I have to figure out who has written which letter? Can we write a code for this? Well let us find out in our next joy natural language processing.
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING: AUTHOR STYLOMETRY 01
Observe the conversation happening between these two teachers. One teacher is getting her feed back by the students and the other teacher is just listening to whatever this teaching is saying. Let us see the conversation now.
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING: AUTHOR STYLOMETRY 02
Hey anamika! Hey how are you? So how is this semester been? Semester has been great, that’s also reflected in the favour of forms that I received from the students which are graduating, oh nice and there is one regular form that I like to show you for two reasons ok mostly they are and second thing is that I have a feeling who would have written this, wait a second they are anonymous feedback right? Yeah so how do you know who is written it? Yeah yeah they are anonymous but from the style which they write I am doing that I have checked their answer sheets from the beginning I have a feeling of the style that they use so this sheet you see there lot of E usage and lot of adjective so I have a feeling who would have written this. Oh wow.
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING: AUTHOR STYLOMETRY 03
You see what just happened? One teacher by name anamika is talking to another teacher varsha about her feedback as a teacher, students have given her some feedback and in that feedback particularly anamika is impressed with one such students feedback who has given her a whole lot of complements and most importantly anamika realises that all though the feedback is anonymous she has feeling who might have written that feedback, how? She understands some sort of way it is written the sentence the grammar and the style of writing in general even that she is a teacher of a classroom she probably knows how her students write she is trying to figure out who this student could be who has given her complements. Is it really true that we can look at the style of writing and then conclude that this is the person who has written this letter, let us do a small experiment? We have this huge repository called the project Gutenberg all you can do there is download a whole lot of books that are available in a text format free of cost without out any none of these things are copyrighted material, you can get this material and then analyse the data with your programming skills. Now I would like to take a look at some author’s complete work and try to figure out if we can see some signatures in their writing.
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING: AUTHOR STYLOMETRY 04
Hello guys, welcome to stylometry with python. What exactly stylometry is? Stylometry is the quantity study literacy style. It is based on the observation that authors tend to write in relatively consistent, recognizable and unique ways. For example some people write in short sentences while others prefer long blocks of text consisting of many clauses. Everyone has their own unique vocabulary sometimes rich sometimes limited no to people use semi colons dashes and other forms of punctuations in the exact same way. Scholars are use stylometry as a tool to study variety of question for example considerable amount of research has study the differences between the ways in which men and women write, isn’t it cool? So in this tutorial will see stylometric analysis to set of English language text using nltk library of python let’s see this.
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING: AUTHOR STYLOMETRY 05
So what’s the idea? Scholar T C Mendenhall in news paper said that an author stylic signature could be formed by counting how often he or she uses words of different lengths. For example if you pick a novel and count word lengths in a five thousand words segment and then plot a graph of the word length distribution. The curve would look pretty much the same no matter what part of the novel we had print, so isn’t it cool? Will use this idea, will count the number of words of different lengths and then plot it, with this plot will try to understand the author’s style of writing. This analysis is very basic one there are many advanced way of doing such classifications but since it is a very basic course will just motivate you with the idea so let’s see this.
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING: AUTHOR STYLOMETRY 06
Hello guys, see in this video we will prepare the data set. So as the instructor said we will go to the project Gutenberg, you can see the link here. If you go to this web page you will see there are many E books which you can download for free as a text version so we are going to use these E books for our analysis so for you what we have done we have created an Archive which contains all the which contains selected papers which we are going to use for our analysis. So you need to download an unzip the Archive or some papers containing eighty five documents that we will use for our analysis, this eighty five documents have been extracted from this project Gutenberg E book version. When you unzip the Archive it will create a directory called data, so you will have a folder name data, this will be our working directory so what do you have to do? You have to whatever python code you are going to create just create it in this data folder, we have the data will be using nltk library which comes with the anaconda cloud so you can just try importing nltk can your python console and you can see that it is working. Make sure you download all the collections of nltk using nltk download so before we can proceed with the analysis we need to load the files containing all the eighty five papers into convenient data structures ok, the first step is to assign each of the eighty five papers to the proper set since all the files have extend a format we can easily assign each paper to its corresponding authors for this we will use the dictionary data structure so the idea with the dictionary data structure is comes with the key and the value payer so with each key you can store, store its value and you can easily access this particular value using the key so if some of you know the basic data structure then you must know hashing also, in hashing what we do we create a hash of the particular data and whenever we want to extend the data we use that hash value to extend the data so the dictionary data contains the key value payers in Archive key would be the authors name and the list of paper numbers will be the values associated with these keys so let’s see the data world.
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING: AUTHOR STYLOMETRY 07
So, I am on this web page you can click on the link given in the description to download the data so, if you click you will get to this page, you can just click on the download button to download the data, I have already downloaded it, you will get a archive version of the data just click on it so to unzip it and you will get a folder name data so I have this folder name data I will just open it and I can see all the texts so name of the files are federal lists underscore one two three four and so on, these are the files which have been written by some of the authors and our key idea is to understand their style of writing so that we can get some ideas of how we can distinguish different authors using their style of writing. So our analysis we will use these files as input and we will plot the word length distribution and through that we will try to make some sense that whether different people write in a different way or not so these are key idea and these are input file please download it, see it once and let’s start with the code so we are splitting the codes into five categories so these categories are if these files for example are we are going to split categorise these files into five categories, first there are some fifty one papers known to have been written by Alexander Hamilton and there are in these files there are fourteen papers to have been written by James Madison, four of the five papers are known to have written by john j and three papers were co-written by Hamilton and Madison and there are twelve papers disputed between Hamilton and Madison which we don’t know who exactly was the author of these twelve papers so our idea is to understand the style of writing of these papers and then try to analyse this twelve papers whether they were written by Hamilton or Madison so we will use our key idea which we discussed previous videos that we will try to plot the word distribution I mean word length distribution and with this we will try to see whether whether it is really that people people have different way of writing people have different way of writing papers such that they use different length of words differently so in next video will try to write a code for this and will plot the graph of this length word distribution will try to analyse the data. Thank you.
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING: AUTHOR STYLOMETRY 08
So, I will start with the code, I will start with by preparing the data so first I will prepare a dictionary name paper let me first import the nltk so nltk working or not let me check first so I will write in the ipython console import nltk so it’s you can see that it’s not throwing error it means it has been imported successfully before you start your coding you need to download all the constrain all the collections of nltk so for that I will write nltk dot download this function will open new ppi through which you can download all the collections of nltk this required for this stylometry analysis so I will just download everything so up to we download we will start with our dictionary thing so I will write take papers as the dictionary so the first author is I will name is Madison, Madison and the key is Madison and the values will be list of papers which he wrote so I will that is ten, fourteen, thirty seven, thirty eight, thirty nine, forty, forty one, forty two, forty three, forty four, forty five, forty six, forty seven and forty eight so these are the file names if you see the files the name is the first name is same for all the files federal list but after underscore there is the numbering so I am defining these numbers as a list here ok so for Madison he wrote these as I told in a last video that Madison wrote around fourteen papers so these are the fourteen papers which he wrote and then we will create the dictionary for Hamilton so I will put a comma and then I will write Hamilton and Hamilton wrote around fifty two papers so I will write those fifty two numbers which are present there one, six, seven, eight, nine so I have return the list for Hamilton after that after Hamilton comes the Jay so I will create the key and value payer so jay and the values will be jay wrote four papers so two, three, four and five and after jay we have shared papers of Madison and Hamilton so I will just write shared and the values and the list of values are value list are eighteen, nineteen and twenty so three papers they wrote so collaboratively and there are disputed papers which we, we are not sure of who exactly wrote this papers so I will just write this disputed sorry disputed and the value will be a list of some papers which are forty nine, fifty, fifty one, fifty two, fifty three, fifty four, fifty five, fifty six, fifty seven, fifty eight, sixty two and sixty three so these are the papers which are disputed and we really don’t know who exactly wrote so we are doing to analyse for these papers exactly will see that which who who can write this paper by analysing the word length graph of all the authors which you have stated before the disputed papers. Ok so our data is the dictionary is created now I will create I will create a definition of reading files so what the idea is, let me write the definition name read files ok this will taken take one argument name as file name and what we are going to do, we create another dictionary and this dictionary what it will contain. It will contain the key value as the authors name and the key will be the authors name the value will be whatever he wrote will keep all the data in a particular list as a string so the key will be the authors name and the value will be all the data, whatever he wrote so all the data as a single string so let me create a list of name string. So strings as list ok I will create my loop as for file and file name, the file name is my argument. With open I will open my file as so my file name is federal list and with an underscore now will have the curly braces so that I can put the file name so what, what exactly is this? It is the key value which the corresponding value for each key which for each author. So I will put it here and dot txt so I will created the
  
string for the file name so that I can open the exactly file exact file open of particular author. I will open it as f and I will append string which the strings are the list which I created the name of the list is strings dot append and what I am going to append? The file which is which I opened as f, I will read this f dot read and whatever it is reading I will just append it into this string list ok and I will just I will just join it and return it so I will just and what I am going to return is slash n dot join the string that’s it. So what I am going to do with this function, each time I will for each author I will send the file name file name is the list of the which contain the numbers and through that these numbers I will read the file which is present in the data folder for the corresponding author and I will get all the data for particular author, read the string and put it in a single list. Ok what I am going to do with the single list will see in the next video. Thank you.
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING: AUTHOR STYLOMETRY 09
So, you can see here I have downloaded all the collections for nltk you can see its written whatever I needed to download everything has been installed here and will go to our program let me just zoom it we can see let me ok yeah everything is visible now I define what my function is exactly and what this paper dictionary is doing, I will just save it just run it again so everything looks perfect by running it I have created the papers dictionary so by if I just type in my let me just zoom this one ipython console here you can see the ipython console. If I type papers you can see the dictionary Madison contains a list of all his papers Hamilton contains list of all his fifty two papers jay contains four papers, shared are three and these are twelve disputed papers so our dictionary is ok let me clear it ok so next what you have to do, you have to call this function so that we create the actual dictionary that we wanted to create our main dictionary is dictionary key value will be the authors name and the list I mean the value the key will be the authors name and the value will be the string of words I mean all the sentence all the words in a single string so that we can analyse it easily. So that what we are going to do we will create a dictionary out of authors so let me write here let me give the name of the dictionary here is federal list by author ok so this is the dictionary and let me write the loop for author comma files in papers dot items ok so let me just try this once what exactly it does so let me let’s see the let see my ipython console. I will just try this console for I comma j and I already created this papers dictionary so papers dot I items ok I will just print I and k ok you can see it is printing all the values Madison and in his list, Hamilton and his list and jay and his list shared all the list, the list disputed and the list so its work perfectly I wanted this only so I will go to the next line what I am going to do so authors will give me so what I is? I will give me the name of the author and j is giving me the list so author here the variable author will give me the name of the author and files, files here will give me the list so files contain list author contains authors name so what I am going to do the dictionary which the entire dictionary which is just created I will use this federal list by author and key is what? Key is the authors name here it is author, key is author so I will create a author through which I am looking through and what will be the value, value is the list. So what I will do? What I am going to do? I am going to call this function now read files and I will I am going to call this function by giving the list as a parameter so the file name will be my will be the list so files what it will do? The list will go here ok then all the numbers, numbers in this contain numbers so for all the numbers it will read all the files for that particular author and then contacting it all the words strings whatever it is into a single list. Ok and that list I for a particular author I will use it to analyse. What I am what my idea is? I will use that list I will count all the words of a particular length and I will plot the distribution that’s it ok so you will now you know what I am exactly doing why I am calling this function here, so this will give me the list of all the words for a particular author so my dictionary will contain everything here ok I am getting some errors so what is the problem is I put here file name rather than file ok lets run this cool its working so I will just try to print this so that everything looks perfect so for author in papers print this my federal list by author the author author is my variable here I will just print something some sliced hundred character so that
  
lets see everything is working or not? I am getting something it means the dictionary is perfect. I will just delete this. Ok my dictionary has been created, now the only thing I have to do is on this dictionary I have the data I have created my I have done my pre processing I will do the analysis I will count the word and their length and I will plot the distribution and I will see it whether there is difference or not. Let’s see this in next video. Thank you.
NATUTRAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING: AUTHOR STYLOMETRY 10
So, everything is ready we have created the dictionary federal list by authors which contain all the data where key s the authors name and the value is the authors data. Now what we have to do, we have to create words distribution word length distribution exactly so will count the word with the particular length will count them I will create a graph out of it. So let me create a tuple name author authors and the first one is Hamilton second is Madison third is disputed then we have jay and the shared documents ok my tuple is there for authors, I will create two dictionaries author tokens ok let me explain this dictionaries let me create first and length distribution so what I am going to do I go through all these authors and whatever dictionary I created in this dictionary the key value is the authors name even see all this authors name are the key values here I will take the I will take the strings the data contains everything and I will remove all the punctuated things other letters only the words will be there I will take only the words because what we want is the word and their length so first I will do I will create a loop for author in authors is my authors list yeah tokens is equal to I will create a token tokens is equal to nltk dot there is a method for it word tokenize so what it does? It takes a string and create tokens out of it I mean each word will be each string each token tokenize so everything for example punctuated letters words everything will be tokenized, tokenize what I will take the data, so data is present in this dictionary federal list by author and I am taking for each author this import nltk ok so this is done lets will after will filter out the punctuations for that there is an nltk library for it so I will take the author tokens ok so the dictionary I created ok and the key will be key value will be the author and now here is the tricky part I too remove all the punctuations here so I will do it in a very small code so let me let’s see this first for token token in tokens you know what tokens is here ok if any here it is c dot alpha this is a function for c in token so what I am doing for each token in tokens I am checking if it is and alpha alphabet it is made of all the characters only or not any other special characters or numbers something if it is only alphabets then I am I will create a list of it otherwise I will discard it. So for token for token in tokens put the token there so put that tokens in this list that’s it so this line is nothing else you can do it in other way also I just wanted to put it in a single line so for token and tokens if that it’s an alpha correct for c in token whatever token I am getting here is a string so for c in token means all the words in this string if it is a made up of only alphabets I will put this token inside the list otherwise I will discard it so then I got the words out of the for each authors now I just have to calculate the length of it so token length which I created token lengths ok token lengths will be again let me just write it again for token in author tokens of what authors, for token in author tokens what token put what length of it. So I got the I am iterating over all the words which I got for each authors and I am just getting the list of lengths that’s it great I got the list after that I want to get the length distribution of author so I will create a list out of it length distributions authors ok and I call nltk dot frequency distribution this is the function name and I will pass the token lengths and I will just plot length distributions of author let just plot it so maximum length I will put as fifteen up t fifteen words the length of the fifteen words sorry title is equal to author, author means what even it will plot it will show for which author this plot is so this
  
dictionary is length distribution yeah that’s right it was throwing the warning error now its fine let’s let me just make it little bit big and just run it ok I am getting some error str object has not attribute alpha sorry just should be is alpha because, I am checking whether it is an alphabet or not. Ok let me sorry let me run it again ok you can see the plots here you can see there are plots for Hamilton Madison disputed and jay and shared so there are exactly five plots, there are three authors Hamilton, Madison and jay the shared plot is for documents which were shared by Madison and Hamilton and disputed are those which we don’t know. Now see this see the plot it looks exactly almost same but it’s not exactly if you see the plot of jay the samples are the word count I mean they are there are two words two length words there are twelve hundred words around twelve hundred words around of length two and so on it goes distribution goes like this for jay it’s definitely not what this disputed plot is it means that whatever the documents are there in the disputed are definitely not written by jay you can see there the beginning and the tale is definitely different for jay and disputed but if you see and also if you see the shared one its look similar to Hamilton more as compare to the Madison one but if you see the disputed one you cannot you cannot say who exactly wrote the disputed one either it is Madison or Hamilton but you can definitely say that jay didn’t write you can see the plots are different the beginning part is little bit similar to the Hamilton one you can see the beginning of this, this plot of disputed but the tale is more or less similar to Madison or even Hamilton so we cannot even generalise with this but this is a very fun way of seeing what exactly is going on or is it any way related with this at least we were able to say that this jay definitely not didn’t write these disputed. This analysis was given when it was given it was it didn’t account for the authors way of writing things, how they choose words what kind of words they choose they are different there are so many research on this and still not idea so people are still working on this stylometry and now they now there are so many tools through which you can analyse the authors signature and you can predict or you categorised authors documents by analysing their styles. So it has, so this what the program we did was just to see just to motivate you this idea of stylometry you can exactly actually given a document you can do some analysis and get the authors name if you if you have previous data of it. So this is exactly known as data analysis, now a days we have a lot of data you analyse the data and you whenever you get a new data you try to infer from the past data whether this new data is something or not this was the very very main example of doing it because this is the only this was the quickest and simple way of doing it. If you go little further it will become very complex so since this is the very basic course we dint want you to go through the complex one so we did this basic analysis to understand the data at least and we can see the plots and we can at least infer something through this. There are so many methods of doing stylometry, you can go to the web and you can just type stylometry and you will get a lot of lot of way please see this nltk library this is this is a very good library for analysing text, documents actually it is known as nlpk analysis so please see this libraries if you have any problem post it on discussion form. Thank you.
INTRODUCTION TO NETWORKX 01
Hello everyone, in this video we will see the network analysis part using the python library known as networkx so our next joy is six degree of separation it is basically analysing the social network. Before we dive into the world of network I would like you to see this cool library of python known as networkx which is used to analyse visualise networks and even generate them so will see a very basic example of a network, how to create them? How to see them and how to visualise them? In this video I will use network to create simple graphs and then visualise them so let us see this. So let me show you a graph so suppose you can see in my screen that there is a graph of three nodes, nodes these circles are known as nodes and these lines are the edges between them all you can say interactions between them. So for example if you see these nodes as people an edges is friendship among them then see it is a social network kind of thing so for example person one is a friend with person two, person two is a friend with person three, person three is a friend with a person one so this is a you can visualise it as a social interaction graph where people are node and interactions are edges between them so you can see in this graph for example there are three nodes and three edges. If some of you know little bit of graph thing then you must know that this is a complete graph between three nodes if you create a complete graph of three nodes you will have three nodes and three edges. What is a complete graph? Complete graph is nothing where when you have an n nodes if any two pair if you pick there should be an edge between them so I will start my networkx program by creating this graph this three node graph so let’s see this so I will import my library networkx library using the command import networkx as nx will be my alias here ok I have imported my networkx now I want to create a graph. To creating a graph the command is let’s say my graph name will be g and nx dot graph that’s it you can see here dropdown list its already showing the graph ok so this will create a graph now what I have to do my graph is empty, it is created but it doesn’t have anything it doesn’t have any node it doesn’t have any edges so what I will do, I will add some node to add an node in a graph there is an command which is known as g, g is my graph g dot add you can see it will come add node my dropdown list so g dot add node is my command now I will add my node number that’s it I will just add the name of my node here it is one so I will add one so it means that after this command one as a node has been added to my graph, graph is g so let me see my graph one has been added now I will add two same thing g dot add node in second node two so, node two has been added node one and node two has been added, now I will add node three so g dot add node and three awesome so all the nodes have been added what else now my graph contains three nodes one two and three but there are no interactions, I mean there are no edges between them I have to define I have to tell the networkx to add the edges between the nodes which I want so I want edge between one and two, two and three and one and three. How to do it? Let’s see this. So the command is very simple, like adding node I can add edges so g dot you can predict what I am going to write add edge ok and what is my edge? It should be between you can see its written their arguments ad edge u of edge v of edge it means that from where it is starting, from where it is ending. See it is a undirected edge undirected it means that there is no direction from u to v, you can consider v as u, u as v it doesn’t matter so I will add from one to two one comma two ok one node has been one edge has been added sorry second is two to three I will add g dot add edge two comma three
 
ok and my last edge is one comma three so I will add g dot add edge one comma three ok so according to me my graph has been created I don’t have anything to see here so what I will do I will just print my graph so how to print? I will just add print not graph my edges sorry nodes g dot nodes that’s it lets see what happens I will just run it you can see my nodes are one to three it has been shown here ok you can see the nodes are one comma two comma three ok great but still I ma not able to see my let me try to print the edges ok let’s see what it does ok my edges also being printed this is edges from one to two, one to three, two to three see this is a very small graph so I can I can using this data I can see whether what kind of graph I have bit suppose the graph contains hundreds of nodes then some two hundred edges then what will you do, you cannot just by watching the data you can see what kind of graph it is and you can visualise it so what can you do networkx provides a visualisation of graph using the mat plot lib library so that is too also very simple I will just import the mat dot lib library so import mat plot lib dot pyplot as my alias plt ok I imported mat plot lib library now this graph which I have created the g I will draw it as nx dot it will show and plt dot show that’s it let me just clear my clear my ipython console here ok I will just run my program to see what it does. Ok it is saying that draw is missing the required positional argument g, I didn’t draw what I am I didn’t say what I am going to draw g is my I need to draw g so I will put g here ok I don’t like this fifty ipython console so I will clear it ok I will run it again awesome you can see my graph this is exactly what I wanted to make ok this is my graph of three nodes and the interactions are ok great ok now suppose I told you that this is a graph of three nodes and this is a complete graph of three nodes what if I want to create the graph a complete graph of ten nodes maybe twenty nodes I will have to add this nodes and edges again when there is a way which you know the first thing that will come in your mind is creating a lop through loop you can add off course you can do it. There is an another way also one way is to create a list of nodes, let me show you how, rather than adding this nodes like this whatever I can do I will create a list let’s say l and I put the nodes here that’s one comma two comma three ok I don’t need all these thing I will just delete and what I will do rather than adding just command g dot add node there is one more command which is g dot add nodes underscore from you can see from is written and you can give the nodes for adding it can be any kind of container which can be a list so I will add l here ok to I added same nodes one two three so that I can check whether it is showing me the same kind of thing or not I will just run this program awesome I am getting the same output so you can do something like that. Now there is one more beautiful thing with the networkx it comes with all kinds of graphs pre defined graphs, suppose I want to create a complete graph of let’s say what I said before that I want to create a complete graph of twenty nodes I don’t need all these things we just delete all this things and I will just add nx dot complete you can see complete graph is there, complete graph of how many nodes I want, so let add ten nodes ok and save it as g let us just delete this awesome so g will be my graph and I create nx dot complete graph of ten nodes one two three four five six seven eight nine ten there are ten nodes and it is a complete graph you can see you can change the number of nodes let’s say I want twenty nodes so I will just run this again save it and run it you see complete graph of twenty nodes great so there is a lot of things which you can do with networkx this is just I wanted to show how can visualise simple simple graph so suppose I want to create a there are so many layouts for networkx you can see you can just type networkx generators, generators are the graph

generators there are so many ways through which you can create awesome graphs so suppose I want to create a random graph, what is a random graph exactly? So suppose there are hundred nodes in a graph what I will do, I will pick two nodes and then I will put an edge between these two nodes with some probability so what I will do I will take every two nodes and I will add an edge with probability let’s say zero point five and I will do with this I will do this step with all pair of nodes so with this algorithm I will create a graph, this graph is known as random graph. So what is the speciality of this random graph? Is that in such kind of graph if you pick any node you will see that the degree of that node will be the average degree will be near to the average degree of the graph so you can learn about this graph this is known as adosh graph or random graph you can just search on goggle and read about this so I can create this graph through networkx the command is gnp underscore random underscore graph so I can just type here so I will just type here gnp underscore random underscore graph and it will be random these are the number of nodes as you can see here gnp random graph n is the number of node, p is the probability but which I am putting an edge between an two vertices or nodes so I can put here let say twenty graph and let’s say I was telling you there zero point five is the probability ok so let’s see what happens. I will run it again you can see this is random graph so you can see all the nodes have almost equal kind of degrees or you can say it is if you pick any node here the degree is almost equal to the average degree of the whole graph so I can change the probability here I can increase it I can decrease it so I can make it zero point two and twenty nodes you can see the graph here there is one isolated node which is not this graph is not connected means you cannot reach to any node by traversing the edges with networkx you can do lot of thing just go to this networkx page and you can see a lot of things here I just wanted to make sure that you understand the visualisation part and little very little very basic network which we are going to use in our social network analysis or you can say network analysis part which is our next joy so in next video we will see some more of this we are going to use a very good visualisation tool which is known as gaphi and will see how we can visualise a graph using that tool and how you can generate beautiful graphs. Thank you.
INTRODUCTION TO NETWORKX 02
Hello guys, in last video we saw small example of networkx how we can create smaller graphs and how we can visualise them using our mat plot lib library. So in this video we will see some more of networkx and then will see how to generate graphs in a new format as a file which is known as gexf format and then we will use a new tool know as gephi two to see and visualise the graph. There are so many things which you can do with the gephi tool so let’s see this. So again I will, let me clear my ipython console ok let me clear let me make a basic graph random graph using gexf format sorry networkx so I will write my command to create a random graph nx dot gnp random graph its coming here and I will just put my numbers of nodes and the probability with which I am putting edge between two nodes so let me put let me put some more number of nodes so I can see something, let me put number of nodes as fifty and probability be zero point three ok great. Let me just see this graph once so mat dot lib I have imported ok so I will put nx dot draw my sorry I will I will save this graph as G I will save it ok g is equal to values and I will draw this graph. After that I will show this graph great let me see this let me run this ok you can see its very dense because number of nodes are more and the probability is ok point thirty percent with thirty percent probability and adding at just it not a complete graph it looks like a complete graph but it is a random graph ok let me do some, some more things with this graph so let me come to my let me go to my ipython console ok let me make it side by side so that it is visible ok what I am going to do? I am going to just print the number of nodes here sorry not the number of nodes the nodes so this is g dot nodes ok these are my nodes zero one two three four five six seven eight nine two eleven twelve up to forty nine its starts with zero ok let me if you it’s coming as a container so let me print it print g dot nodes ok now it is a list so these are the this is the list of all nodes which are present tin this graph same way I will print the edges so print g dot edges ok it is printed the edge list it means which node is connected to which node for example you can see here zero is connected to three, zero is connected to five, zero is connected to eight, zero is connected to ten, zero is connected to so on and something like that so now I can do a lot of things here you can see the edge list here suppose I want to know the degree of each node so I can just print it here. Else print g dot degree of let’s say zero show me thirteen zero has thirteen degree. So something like that I can do with this graph I can analyse a lot of things ok you can see you can go to the documentation I can see a lot of things here there are lot of functions lot of algorithms lot of graph type just explore it. What I am going to do, I will generate one more different type of graph here which is known as scale free graphs which was given by barabasi I am going to generate it. You do not have to know what exactly it is I am just I just wanted a new type of graph which is different from a random graph that’s why I am generating it so that I can show you that difference. So I will just generate this let it be here so I will generate this scale free graph so it is nx dot the command is barabasi Albert graph barabasi underscore Albert graph ok it takes two arguments one is n number of nodes and second is m, m means each node is each node coming with two edges so how it works? In starting there are very few nodes for example there are two nodes and then at each iteration a new node comes and whenever the new node comes it comes with two edges and these two edges get connected to those node which has higher degree so the probability of getting connected to already existing node is higher for
 
that node whose degree is very high. So this why this process this process happens and at the end the node which is having higher degree at the end will have more degree so and there will be having few nodes of having high degree and very high number of nodes having very low degree so this is known as scale free graph. So I will so I have put this random sorry again I will put this fifty here and m has two and each node is coming with two new edges ok and I will see what else is different from this mode ok I will just run this you can see its exact it’s so deferent from this gnp I mean the random graph. Now why is it? You can see there are few nodes one two these nodes which are closer to the centre having high degree and these nodes which are at the periphery are having less some has low as one this is the connected graph you can see all nodes are connected but very few nodes are having high degree and very large nodes are having low degree so this is known as professional attachment new nodes when they come they prefer to attach to old nodes which are having higher degree. So it is known as the in real world examples most of the many nodes are not exactly random most of the networks are not exactly random they are actually skill free the people have claimed like that. So what are our aim is now, this graph what we have generated will see this graph in a new format will write this graph in a file and the format of that file will be gexf so to do that what I will do, ok so I want have to write this graph I created the graph so after that I will just write a statement to, to write a graph in gexf the command is nx dot write underscore gexf you can see it is a gexf is my format the first argument will be my graph which is g and the second will be the path or the file name if you are not giving the path the file will be saved in your current directory. I will just put the name as analysis one dot gexf that’s it ok great I will run this again the network has been created and you can see the if I go to my directory you can see this file has been created. If I just open it let me just open it with my sublime text, you can see that this format is there to represent this graph some this is some xml format. If you if you try to see this you can see that they are nodes, nodes with some id and with some label and there are edges with some id and source from where to where it is. Ok and so this is how we this is some xml format so my graph has been created in gexf format why I am doing it? This is gexf format I am going to import in a new tool known as gephi, gephi is an application through which you can visualise graph easily and you can do a lot of different kind of analysis in a in one click so I have already downloaded gephi in my computer it’s very easy just goggle gephi the first link gephi download the first link you get go there and just download it nothing else is required. Maybe java one point eight is one point seven or one point eight is required that you can download easily nothing else is there, just download it, I have downloaded it, if you require if you facing any problem with gephi just let us know or put it on discussion form will show you. So I am going to skip that download part of gephi I will just open gephi in my in my system and I will see this graph I will analyse this graph or visualise this graph so this is my gephi then your version point o point nine so I will just go to file and open my graph which I just created on through my networkx which is which is barabasi Albert graph. So this is my graph ok analysis one I will just open it showing how many number of nodes are there ninety number of edges are ninety six is asking me what kind of graph it is, it is a undirected graph I will just put ok we can see the graph is there I will just zoom it using my scrollbar ok I am on windows on Mac its things are different and even though also little bit things are different so you can see this is my graph ok now let me show you a very unique thing here, you can put any node and you can change the directions

of the nodes very easily here and you can see how many to which node it is exactly getting attached to, this t is the level if I put this it will show me the node level so this is my node number one there are some plug-ins which I will show you what exactly it is but just let just don’t worry about what I am doing ok, that’s it I will just unlabeled it so I can see the nodes. Now what I want I told you that in this graph in this particular graph which is scale free there are few nodes which has higher degree and there are lot of nodes which are having lower degree so what I am going to do here is you can see this button follow cursor this is my button this showing the node colour and this is size so what I am going to do I will change the colour according to the degree how will I do it? I will go partition not ranking I will do the ranking choose the attribute as degree and I will change the colour here as let’s say which colour is easily distinguishable let say this ok and I will apply you can see these are the dark nodes let me just zoom it the dark nodes are those which are having higher degree, you can see there are so many nodes which are light, now still it is not very much visible or comfortable so what I am going to do I will change the size of the nodes based on again degree, min size I will put let say ten here and max size I will put as twenty alright see what happens. See let me make it twenty and make it forty its clearly visible now see, you can see exactly very few nodes which are very big and a lot of nodes are smaller smaller smaller ok such kind of easy visualisation if you want to just analyse your network through eyes and see what exactly is going on and you can do such kind of thing on there are so many things which you can do. One more thing I will show here you can see follow my cursor and you can see there are so many layouts what is this? I will just put this and I will just run it you can see the nodes are re assigned in a circular way this way you can see a lot of things and you can analyse graph very easily I will just increase the size of nodes sorry edges it is visible, now see the right pane on the right side there are so many things which you can do for example I want to see the average degree I will run it, it will show me the degree distribution. If you see the degree distribution here see the points here you see that there are few nodes which are having high degree they is one node exactly two or one node sorry having eighteen degree there are so many nodes of degree two there are twenty four nodes of degree two so this is what scale free network it follows something like this or it is known as power law this is known as power law. You can read more about this what else you can do there you can run this network diameter and in one click and for undirected you in one click you will see the diameter here so the diameter is four. There are so many things which you can do you can run the page rank modularity so I am not doing it because we don’t understand it properly I mean its very basic I wanted to show a very basic thing, how to create a graph in networkx and visualise it using your gexf format you can even using this data laboratory you can import or export this graph in a spread sheet or see comma separated value we have talked about this comma separated values in gps fun activity. You can import it comma separated value file and then visualise it you can then preview your network through this you can see a very beautiful network as been created here. Where the edges are curved you can save it save your network as pdf and you can do lot of things here so this I just wanted to give you a quick introduction to this very beautiful tool known as gephi g e p h I and you can just download it you can see in next in next joy which is network analysis actually six degree of separation you will see what exactly it is. Will see you can you see the importance of network in our life and I just wanted to motivate you with this visualisation tool how sometime it is very important to see

things and before just getting to the coding and writing functions to analyse it just sometime you need to watch things closely and then see what exactly is going on, so you can see this is extremely good and do a lot of things with this tool so please if you have any problems if you are facing any problem with this with that gephi download please post it on form we can put a quick video to download gephi, how to download gephi, how to install gephi. So thank you.
SIX DEGREES OF SEPERATION: MEET YOUR FAVOURITES
Have you ever tried reaching your favourite celebrities! Well in today’s world it is very much possible. Let us find out in our next joy six degrees of separation.
SIX DEGREES OF SEPERATION: MEET YOUR FAVOURITES 01
Hey shubudha what’s up? Hello sir I didn’t see. So I see that you keep watching a whole lot of videos. Sir, I was feeling very sleepy so I thought I will watch one or two song and then I will get back to my work. That’s fine but what peculiar is you keep watching ranbir kaapor’s videos all the time. Yes, I am very fascinated by his work I like his acting and I really want to meet him given a chance but I don’t know I will be able to meet him it’s like, why not? Do you know that it’s today not very difficult to go and catch hold of a person let say if you want to even meet the president of the United States. Do you know that you know someone knows someone who knows the president? Sir really I can meet ranbir kappor? Or, any other person who I want to meet. Ok does it sounds surprising if I tell you that you probably know ranbir, no through the common friend’s common friend, which means ranbir friend’s friend’s friend is probably shubudha. It is you, will it happen? That’s why so I did it is a very nice science that goes behind that so I will explain it to you. Its gonna take quite some time for me to explain the science behind it, I think I should not be disturbing people here why don’t you walk outside, yeah sure. So shubudha you off course of know obama right? Yeah I know but I don’t know him personally, that’s right. So what if I tell you that you actually know obama through someone through someone through someone is that believable? Of course not, how will I know obama through someone, sounds like it farfetched, yeah. So this is a fact. I know a good friend from Germany and her dad has worked with obama and he knows obama really well ok and obama also knows him very well, so what just happened? I know this friend from Germany and off course she knows her dad really well. I know her very well she knows her dad very well and her dad knows obama very well and you know me very well, so now you see you know me one, I know this friend from Germany two and friend off course know her dad very well three and the dad knows obama very well four, through four people you are connected to obama. That’s surprising yeah what is more surprising is probably you think this is a co incidence, yeah because this might be a co incidence because what if this is not true for any two people in the world. Correct, do you observe something? You know obama through three people and every friend of yours; they know obama through four people, four people. You see they know you, you know me, I know yes and so on correct? So similarly it is believed rather it is known experimentally that any two people in the world are separated on an average of six people, any two people in fact. Really? But how can we prove it? Yeah! So my point was this you were talking about ranbir kapoor right? yeah I don’t think it is very difficult for you to find someone who might know someone who knows ranbir kapoor really well, so it’s all about knowing how to reach ranbir kapoor, the fact is you know someone who might know someone who knows ranbir kapoor really well, well but it’s difficult to find, I am only talking about the fact that there exists a path between you and ranbir kapoor through a couple of friends. How to find that? It is a difficult question to answer but a very well known question in sociology is the fact that any two people are connected by on an average of let’s say six hobs in fact within India any two people I believe should be connected in less than two or three hobs so it should be difficult for you to meet ranbir kapoor as they say where there is a will there is a way, if you attempt whole heartedly you might meet your dream star.
  
Maybe I can find that path which is difficult to reach ranbir kapoor that’s right so it’s going to be whole lot of hard work but the science of it is that you can always find such a path, I am sure that you still don’t believe it, yeah slightly yeah so I am not still convinced, very convinced so what I will do is now take you to the desktop and show you by writing the program, I will assume the population of the world is so much and I will show you if this is really true, if we assume some random friendships that any two people are actually connected with very few hobs.
SIX DEGREES OF SEPERATION: MEET YOUR FAVOURITES 02
Hello guys, welcome to programming screen cast of ‘six degrees of separation’ so before going to the actual programming screen cast let us see some few pre requisites that is required. The first pre requisite that is required is you must know what is the graph data structure? By graph I don’t mean this kind of a graph which you would have been doing in your school physics, chemistry something like that, you take some quantity on your x axis and you take some quantity on your y axis and you observe as you vary this quantity what is the variation in the other quantity, so such thing is what you call as a graph in till your school days, this is not what we are going to say as a graph, we are going to say something like this a set of few points and lines as graph so basically graph is nothing but group of some points and lines that lie between the points that is what we call as a graph and technically we call the points as nodes and lines as edges this is the technical terminology so to illustrate better let me take an example, let us consider the railway network of the city of the country railway network of the country so the nodes or the points let us get used to the terminologies nodes and edges, the nodes in this network is nothing but the cities or the stations and the edges are laid if there is a direct train between the two cities at least one direct train must be there only then we will draw an edge this is how we will construct this railway network. So between any two cities if you take there may be an edge or they may not be an edge depends on there is a direct train or not so for example see two cities Chennai and bengaluru there is an edge between these two cities because there is some direct train between these two cities where as if you see these two cities Chennai and Guwahati or guwahati and Bengaluru there is no edge because there were no direct trains and see this graph is actually dynamic in real scenario because trains maybe introduced every now and then as well as few trains maybe not operated because of various reasons so this graph keeps on changing that I what I been made and dynamic edges maybe newly added or deleted anything may happen so this is just earn example that there existed a direct train then you will put an edge if there is no direct train you don’t put an edge that is how it is and if there is an edge you can say that I can reach this node to this node that is from Chennai I can reach bengaluru and from bengaluru I can reach Chennai that is what is what is what is captured if there is an edge but it doesn’t mean that if there is no edge we cannot reach this at all so let us see, see there is no edge between Chennai and guwahati but still you can have another city in between Kolkata and you can reach guwahati through Kolkata that is you take a train from Chennai to Kolkata and from Kolkata you can take a train to guwahati this is what you call as a path so path is basically the way which you can reach from one node to another that is what we technically call as a path so there is no edge between Chennai and guwahati but there exist a path so it is not the case that if there is no edge there is no path there may be a path even if there is no direct rain see from Chennai you cannot directly reach guwahati but via Kolkata you can reach guwahati that is the meaning and it is not all the case that there will be just one path there may be multiple paths well as you could see here so if there is a edge you can say that you can definitely reach from this city to this city and if there is no edge that is not the case that there is no way to reach there may be a way to reach even if there is no edge between the two cities that is you
  
have some cities as an intermediate destination intermediate point through which you can reach your decided destination that is from Chennai to Bangalore there is a direct edge you can directly reach from Chennai to guwahati there is no edge but still there is a path via Kolkata to reach guwahati from Chennai as well as from guwahati to Chennai as well the same path can be followed and as you would see most of the railway network is by direct functional that is you have trains from both the directions, if there is a train from Chennai to bengaluru there is obviously a train from bengaluru to Chennai that’s how mostly it works that’s why it is undirected graph which we call it as undirected that is directions doesn’t matter from Chennai to bengaluru or bengaluru to Chennai both path exist so this is what we call as an undirected graph and we would always be interested in finding the shortest path there may be multiple paths that may be present let me show you, see this graph there may be multiple paths that may be present from Chennai to guwahati see one path is Chennai to Kolkata, Kolkata to guwahati other is Chennai to bengaluru, bengaluru to Kolkata, Kolkata to guwahati there are two paths in this smaller example where may be multiple paths may be present in that case you have multiple options we always go with the shortest path by shortest I mean minimal number of switches of trains in this example there maybe some cases where we have something called weighted graph that is the edges will be having weights so basically you can think of it has a distance between two cities or the time the train takes to travel you can consider anything as your weight so that would be captured here as weight so if for example Chennai to bengaluru let us say the distance is four hundred kilometres this edge would have a label four hundred so something like that the distances would be here as a weight and we would like to find the one the path where the total weights that is the sum of individual weights is minimal that is if you some of all the weights Chennai to bengaluru, bengaluru to Kolkata, Kolkata to guwahati as well as Chennai to Kolkata, Kolkata to guwahati you will find the sum and wherever the answer is minimal you will take that path that is what you call as a shortest path in a weighted graph but here we don’t consider weights I just say the number of trains I need to switch that in a undirected case that is what I am considering here in this case the shortest path is from Chennai to Kolkata, Kolkata to guwahati just I need to take two trains but if here I take this path then I have to take three trains Chennai to bengaluru, bengaluru to Kolkata, Kolkata to guwahati so I will have to take three trains so this is not a shorter path in this scenario the shortest path will be generally preferred and whether there will be a path always between any two pair of nodes that is a next question that is of our interest and in some cases there may exist a path in any pair of nodes you take in some cases it may not exist. When in case if a graph is such that between any two nodes you take in the graph there always exist at least one path then you call it as a connected graph see if at least one path exists between any two nodes then you call that graph as connected graph. So out railway network is almost the connected graph because from any city in India you can reach to any other city although you may not have direct trains you definitely have a path that is mostly as much as I know the capital cities are mostly well connected so you can reach from any place to the capital city of the state in from that city you can reach to any city of your of your interest so I fell the railway network of India is connected that’s a connected graph so this is now just one place where graphs are used, graphs can be used in many places even people may involved in the graphs that is one such graph were people are involved is something which we all regularly use I guess most of all

used like daily routine facebook so facebook network is a network which involves people so as I said the nodes are people an edge is put if the two people are friends with each other in that case you will put the edge so this is how the facebook network is constructed this is how the facebook analyses the data, the facebook would store the details of your friendships and analyse it will give you recommendations right, you may know this person, you may want to send a friend request to this person such recommendations all these analysis are done for that data has to be stored so the for storing this kind of data oh who is friends with whom facebook uses the graph data structure that I sit denoted people by nodes and edges are put if the people are friends with each other and you can download the facebook data set from this particular link I had already downloaded so I will not be downloading again so the thing that you have to download is there is a text file called facebook combined so basically they have a different versions I guess the discretion is also available in the link you can read through it the thing is they had collected data at various time intervals the various geographical location and they had combine everything into a single text file that is what we have it as facebook combined dot txt just download that particular thing and one more thing that I want to tell is graph is something that I had shown you if you would see this is a pictorial representation of a graph we have nodes and edges this diagrammatical representation is easier on our minds but how do we store this in a computer? We cannot feed in this figure and ask the computer to understand this, we need to store it in some specialised format, there are some formats by which you can store the graph data so there are many formats actually but I will be discussing just one format that would be used in our facebook data that is how we get our face book data and I am just going to discuss that format. Let us see, see the format is called edge list representation so just consider a sample graph there are nodes one two three four and this is how the edges are present there is an edge between one to two, there is an edge between two and three, there is an edge between three and four. So you just I had said one two two three three four one space two, two space three, three space four this is how you store it so this is what you call as an edge list. Edge list is one of the representation for graph, there are many other representations you can look it up as well as what are the other representations there are some advantages and disadvantages associated with each representations you can take a look at it as an advanced material in graphs.
SIX DEGREES OF SEPERATION: MEET YOUR FAVOURITES 03
So, as I had said I have downloaded the facebook data see edge list format as I had explained as been used here there is an edge between person zero and person one person zero and person two and so on see the persons have been anonymous that is if you don’t know the name and other details about the person they have been associated some dummy id and that id is used to identify the persons that is the way you identify the nodes in the network so it’s an anonymous data you can download from the link that I had shown in the power point and it will be available in the description as well you can check out that and you can download this data. Now given that we have seen our data let us get to programming alright to deal with graphs we have package in python called networkx let me import it import network and given that the name is linked here let me use a shorter alias name as n xi will call nx so this is how the package that you used to analyse the graphs so the as I had shown the data was in edge list format so I had to read that data so for that the functionality is nx dot read underscore edge list see the names are also intitutive you can understand what it does and see you are getting the arguments you have to give the path of the file in my case the file is in the same path as that of my programme so I am just giving the name of the file, if your file is in different path you need to specify the complete path. So the name of the file is facebook underscore combine dot txt that is the name of the file alright may be I will maximise this pane so that its easier for you so I have maximised this pane so you have read the edge list so as a result of reading the edge list a graph object would be created that is sort of graph structure would be created and we need to capture the created structure so we will capture it by the variable G, G for graph basically so will capture it this way alright so what I am going to do is, I am going to compare the shortest path length by length I mean the number of edges you have to pass in a if you take the shortest path, that is in our example from Chennai to Kolkata, Kolkata to guwahati was the shortest path that is there we are two edges Chennai to Kolkata and Kolkata to guwahati so that two is the length of the shortest path is what I say. So like that I am going to find the length of each pair of nodes the shortest path that is the shortest path of the each pair of nodes, is what I am going to find. So for that I need to take the list of all the nodes right? let me capture that in a variable N, N for nodes basically let me say is equal to list of the nodes is what I want so let me type cast to the list and I will append the nodes of the graphs by telling G dot nodes this is how you get the nodes of the graphs and you are converting it into a list format so you are getting the list of the nodes, so that is what you are doing as well as the intention that I am having here is I am going to find the length of the shortest path between each pair of nodes each pair of nodes possible so between node number zero and one, zero and two, zero and three, one and two, one and three, one and four and so on so on each pair of nodes possible, I am going to find length of the shortest path and I am going to observe something so, let me do that I will for that I need to store the length of the shortest path in some list to observe something so let me store it, let me say shortest path list shortest path list so shortest path length list let me say I need a list and I am having an empty list here and now as I said I am going to check for each pair of nodes right so I need to run a loop and iterate over all these possible nodes so, I will run a loop for u, u is a node let
  
us say for u in nodes we have capture the list of nodes in the variable N u in N as well as we need tyres like this u would capture one of the node we need to capture another node so that we find the length of the shortest path between that tyre so we will find another will take another node for v in N so what I am going to do is I am going to find the length of the shortest path but it should not be found for all the nodes because if both the nodes are the same then it doesn’t make sense right I want to go from Kolkata to Kolkata it doesn’t make sense right so these two nodes must be different so only if they are different you should go for finding the shortest path length so I am going to give the check here u s not equal to v that is the nodes are different in that case you have to find the length of the shortest path let me call it l for length so for that we have a functionality in networkx nx dot shortest path length see you have a functionality here shortest path length G source target this is the format so you have to pass the graph object G and your source node is u target node is v between these two nodes you want to find the length of the shortest path and let us print it print let us say shortest path between u and v is of length l we have captured the length on variable l so will display that l here as well as I had said I am going to append each of the shortest path calculator onto this particular list shortest path length list so I will append that shortest path length list dot append the value of l so till now what I have done? I have read the edge list format graph data and I have captured it into a graph object first I had imported the network nx library then I had used it to read the edge list format data and I have imported it into a graph object then I capture the list of all the nodes from the edge list that is the edges where given from that we have to capture the list of all the nodes that we had done and we are planning to find the shortest path length between all possible pair of nodes and do some analysis on it. That is our aim for that will have list, shortest path length list which will store the list of all the shortest path lengths, all possible pair’s shortest path length it will be stored here and so we need to find the length of all possible pair shortest path so that for that we are doing we are iterating over the list of nodes we take a node u we take another node v if they both are different we go for computing the shortest path length and we print the length of the shortest path and we append it to our list, so by the end of this loop all pair shortest path is calculated and you have that stored in this particular list. So now from this I want do find the minimum value that is the least value of the shortest path between the two pair of nodes that I can say I can say the minimum value of the shortest path let me say minimum shortest path length is nothing but I want to find the minimum value from this list, this list will contain the lengths of all pairs shortest path so I want to find the minimum value so let me find the minimum shortest path length list from this list I want to find the minimum value just like minimum I want to find the maximum let me copy and paste it and modify I will copy I will paste this I will say maximum so for this I have to use the functionality max so min is the functionality that will return the minimum element in a list max is a functionality that will return the maximum element in the list so maximum of the all the shortest path length would be returned here and the minimum value would be returned here so given that we have found the minimum and maximum what next mathematically? Average right? you want to find the average shortest path length so to find the average we need package called numpy let us import it import numpy this particular package has most of the mathematical operators that we generally use average operator is also defined in this particular package so I have imported numpy and let me find the average so average shortest path length is nothing but in

numpy package you have average function see you could get it here average and from this list shortest path length list from this list you want to find the average alright you have found it now the next job is you want to print all these values so let us print minimum shortest path length ok that is stored in the variable minimum shortest path length alright just like this we want to print the maximum as well as average that whatever we have computed we want to print the values so let me copy, copy and paste here and let me make the modification, minimum and maximum and next we want is maximum and that particular thing is stored in the variable max spl so we will have it here and the next thing is we want to find the average. Average shortest path length average shortest path length alright so we have done we have done with our program so maybe we will just I will save it and we will have a quick overview to analyse the graph data set we need networkx package we have imported it and see we are reading it from the edge list format we have downloaded we read the edge list format and we captured the graph object and from that graph we are extracting the list of all the nodes and then we want to find the shortest path length between each possible pair of nodes in the graph. So that is our intension for that to store all the lengths and analyse later we are having a list which stores all possible shortest path length. So to find shortest path length between all possible pair of the nodes we have loops two for loops running you pick a node u, you pick another node v and if they are different you find their shortest path print it and append it to the list that is what you are doing so at the end of this loops what happens is between every possible pair of nodes whatever the length of the shortest path it would be stored in this particular list. So now we are analysing this list, we are finding the minimum of all possible values that is all the values of all shortest path lengths. We are finding the minimum then maximum then the average to find average we need library called numpy so we have imported numpy in numpy the functionality of average has been defined and we are importing it. So given that we have computed all these values we will be printing it that is what we are doing and by six degrees of separations what we mean is the average shortest path length on an average you can reach from anyone to anyone on the earth if you take the shortest path by maximum six that is the average shortest path length would be maximum six this is what we mean by six degrees of separations, so let me give you an intuition for why this is true. So just assume that you have hundred friends in your facebook so we generally tend to make friends with people who are like us right so those friends may also have further hundred friends so the next level if you consider your friends friends that is hundred into hundred and the next level hundred into hundred into hundred see if you go just one level below the number of people you met is increasing exponentially so if you trace just sic levels you can definitely cover the entire population of the world. This is the intuition behind six degrees of separation concept ok I hope you are clear with the concept, you are clear with the terminologies of graph data structure how to deal with it, how to code it, I hope you are clear with it. Maybe you can pause here think for a while and you can then proceed with running the code and this is not just only functionality available here actually there are a lot of functionalities available here maybe let me show you. Nx dot I will just press a tab sorry I am sorry nx dot nx I will show you the other functionalities nx dot see a lot of functionalities available here and you can go to the console as you know by typing in the functionality and giving the question mark at the end you would get the documentation of what that functionality is all about. If you have some idea of graph theory the math behind it, if you

have some idea you can understand it really well but still even if you don’t have it it’s never a problem all this is nothing but the intuitive thing translated into hardcore mathematics that’s it its really very easy you can pick up that so you can I would recommend that you guys explore this networkx library really well you understand the various functionalities, you see that what all can be done you will realise that it has whole lot of things which is otherwise difficult if this is not present. If you are asked to do this all pairs shortest path to find the shortest path there is an algorithm that runs for some the mathematics behind it everything it runs for some pages in some standard text books if you see. so we have this particular functionalities that finds the shortest paths that makes our life easier if we have to implement this from the scratch it would take a lot of time. So networkx really simplifies a tasks of dealing with graph so you can analyse the parameters of the graph without having to worry about the minute details that is advantage of using networkx. Alright please do explore it ok let me save and run it so before that let me restore the pane alright so here we have the output will be getting the output in the console so let me run the file. See the shortest path is being computed between the different pair of nodes. Are you getting somewhere more than six the average will convert to six it will take a lot of time because see there are so many nodes see three thousand nine hundred some nodes are there so there are around four thousand nodes I guess, you can check out that in the description of the data set as well, how many nodes and How many edges are present is given there, even that there are so many nodes present it would take some time to compute but you can see what is the minimum maximum average also do explore the other parameters and please do discuss in the discussion form of your explorations. Thanks for watching this video, have a nice day.
AREA CALCULATION: DONT MEASURE
Do you know the area of your home state? Can you calculate it? Well! You can. Let us find out in our next joy area calculation.
AREA CALCULATION: DON’T MEASURE 01
Sir, I must say that I am a proud Punjabi, you know why? Punjab has become so popular despite being such a small state. See that's right it is a highlight of our country for a simple reason that you take any actor that matter in Bollywood, you take any outdoor sports you will see good number of Punjab’s ok you go on enumerating good actors of our country good number of them will be from Punjab, I have been observing from this from decades look at the hockey team of India, cricket team of india Punjab is dominant, not dominant but there are good number of Punjabis in cricket team and hockey team and you name it. Right? I also wonder the same Punjab being such a small place it is generated a lot of celebrities so far right? So what was you are wondering given the size of Punjab how is it doing so well? Exactly I think it makes just less than one twentieths of India size. I doubt that so Punjab appears to be small it is not one twentieths even lesser than that a lot lesser than that, how do we even calculate this? OK that’s a good question so given that we are talking about computing, let me ask you one question if I give you a following fact the size of india area of india is three million square kilometres roughly approximately ok and I will give you the map of India in that I will give you Punjab as well, ok is there any way you can compute the area of Punjab? Just by knowing these two facts fact number one, area of india is three million square kilometres and you are given a raw map of india with these two things can you compute? Sir I don’t think so this doesn’t make a difference, you think you think data insufficient that you probably can’t even go close to computing what could be the area of Punjab right? So let me give you a fascinating idea in computer science called estimation, so in places where you cannot accurately compute something you can estimate rather approximate alright so let me tell you how exactly that is done. Let me use the board right now look at this. You see the you see a square here right and let me write down let me write a bigger one let me write a big square rectangle whatever anything is fine and it is easy for you to calculate the area of this. Right? It is very easy. Once you calculate the area of this don’t you think it’s easy to compute the area of this, why is that? What do you think is the area of this part simran? It’s just the half of the, correct! It is pretty obvious; this will be half of the entire area of this rectangle correct? Yeah so far so good now what if I try to ask this question forget this region, what if I were to give you a random region given that you know what is the area of the rectangle can you compute the area of this region? How would you compute? This will be difficult to compute, ok for a for for someone who doesn’t know the idea that I am gonna say, they might even think this is quite impossible question to solve but here is a very nice way of solving this problem. What you do is assume you go there simran OK you needn't go just I am asking you to imagine that you go that side and then take a you have played a dart game yeah yeah where you throw arrows at a target yes yes, you go there and imagine this to be a dart put a dart here if possible and then keep shooting the arrows, the arrows will fall inside the squares it must fall inside the squares, now what you do if you estimate
 
those arrows that fall inside this region ok and those that fall outside this region that will give you a good estimate of what is the area of this region given this region so what I am trying to say, out india map here and try to close your eyes and try to put a dart on the india map and see how many times your random darts fall on Punjab and how many times it doesn't and that will give you a good estimate. So let me illustrate this to you I am closing my eyes and I am trying to put a dot here randomly you see my eyes are closed ok so on and so forth I keep putting dots ensuring that I am putting inside the square if I am putting outside don’t worry so on and so forth now let’s see so there are some points outside some points inside based on what is the area of this region you will have proportionate amount of dots inside and proportionate amount of dots outside, so here is a challenge for you, can you try simulating this on your computer? Can you try to see if you can write a program computes the area of random looking region like this, I can surely try good let’s see.
AREA CALCULATION: DON’T MEASURE 02
Hello everyone, as you all know I got to know an interesting method to calculate the area of Punjab and let us try to verify this method now. As you see you are given a map of india here in which Punjab region is clearly highlighted so I will just go by the method as sir explained so first of all I will start placing the dots in the concerned region randomly so let me do that so I will just placing the dots one two three four yes in this way as you can see I have placed many dots in this region so now let us try to calculate the number of dots present in the Punjab region as well as present in the india region so let me count that one two three four so you see I have around two dots in the Punjab region three dots are out of the concern region which we won’t count and there are eighteen count that are present in the india region ok and I would like to tell you a fact here that for calculating the area of Punjab I have been given the are of india yes for calculating the area of Punjab I have given the area of india so let us go ny the method I will just write number of dots placed in the Punjab region divided by number of dots placed in the india region which will be equal to area of Punjab divided by area of india so now let us try to calculate it, it will be two divided by eighteen into three two eight seven zero zero zero, two divided by eighteen into three two eight seven zero zero zero which will be around three six five triple two which will be around three six five triple two as you can see this is far from area of Punjab, area of Punjab is around five zero three six two square kilometres which is not right so what do you have to say here? Is this method correct? Yes this method is fairly correct but what we have to do here is we have to increase the number of iterations we have to increase the number of dots that are placed randomly here so what we will do here? I will start placing the dots again in the concerned region but now I will more iterations I will place more dots here so let me do that one two three four five so as you see I have placed many dots here so now let me calculate the number of dots here. Let us do that one two three four five six seven eight there are eight dots in the Punjab region and outside Punjab I around placed five hundred ten dots in total so there will be around five zero two dots outside Punjab region so we have eight divided by five zero two into three two eight seven triple zero which calculates to five two five nine two wow this is clearly a very nice method as you can see this is very very close to area of Punjab so as you see as you observed you have to increase the number of iterations you have to place more dots in the concerned region in order to get the accurate area, in order to get accurate area I hope that now this method is clear to you now we will move to the programming screen cast of this particular method thank you.
AREA CALCULATION: DONT MEASURE 03
So, first of all let me give you brief idea of what images are, so an image consists of matrix of pixels. A pixel is basically a colour and a colour id defined by mainly three attributes. I repeat an image is basically a matrix it is a matrix of pixels and a pixel is basically a colour. A colour is defined by mainly three attributes. And the attributes are amount of red present in the colour, amount of blue present in the colour and amount of green present in the colour. Yes the RGB values they define a colour so whatever colour you choose they would be having some amount of red, green and blue in them. And that’s what makes a new colour. I repeat every colour is defined by three attributes, amount of red, amount of green and amount of blue present in that particular colour there are only three primary colours and those are red blue and green and if you mix them in some particular quantities and that makes a new colour so this is what RGB values are all about and every colour is associated with some RGB values. So as you see there are some examples here RGB value of white is basically two fifty five, two fifty five, two fifty five. That means it have two fifty five amount of red, two fifty five amount of green and two fifty five amount of blue in it and RGB value of black is zero, zero, zero. So it has zero amount of red, zero amount of green and zero amount of blue in it. So now let us try to implement a program based on this so that you can get the clear cut idea of how to represent an image and how to assign unique RGB values to an image so let us do that. So first of all I will just show you how can you represent an image here so we will have numpy library here first I will do import numpy as np after that I should also import pil yes I should also import pil and hope that you are already aware of pil and you have seen the previous lectures on image processing so I will just write from pil import image, after that what should we do I will create an image of a particular RGB value I repeat I create an image of a particular RGB value to define the dimensions of the image I will take width and height of the image so I will just write width is equal to for example five and height is equal to four so next what do you have to do, as I said image is basically a matrix so we will take an array here so I will just write array is equal to np dot zeroes in bracket what should I write? I should write the particular dimensions I will write height comma width comma three and after that I will write one more argument here and that is dtype is equal to np dot uint eight so let me explain you what does this function do. So np dot zeros would make an array of the given size of the given dimensions so we have as the first dimension is height here and second dimension is width here and that is five and three and each pixel as you know contains three byte values for RGB so we will write three here so the first dimension is height, second dimension is width and three represent here the byte values for RGB as we know we have each by dedicated to each of the colour so we will have three byte values for RGB ok so one byte for red, one byte for green and one byte for blue. So that’s why we wrote three here and then there another parameter here which is called dtype, what is dtype? Dtype basically represents the data type assigned here, the data type assigned here is uint that is unsigned int the data dtype represent the data type and what is the data type here? That is uint which is called unsigned int. So now we are done with the dimensions of the image and we have also made an array of the image so what now we have to do here is we have to make an image out of this array so I will just write a variable here for example img is equal to image image dot form array form array which should be under parameter that should be passed here
 
would be array. After that I should save this image, image dot save and I should give the name to the image for example will be test dot png ok so we are done with that. So now let me try to build this image and see what happens here so now as you know I will just run this file let us try to find out what kind of image has been formed here so I will just write image one dot py save it so there is some problem here let me check that. We have imported image here and capital I image is not being recognised here that is module pil dot image has no attribute form array sorry it shouldn’t be form array it should be it should be from array please note the mistake here, it should be from array not form array so I will just run this again. So let me now test that image so it is test dot png as you can see there is black sort of square here so what can you infer from this image? Please note the fact that you only initialise the array with zeros, yes you only initialise the array with zeros and the colour corresponding to RGB values as zeros is black as I have already explained the RGB value of black is zero zero zero and you are only give and you are only given zero zero zero here so if I will make an image out of this array with only zeros that will only be consisting of black colour. So as you can see here according to the width and the height we have an image here and it only comprises of black colour. So as you see corresponding to give an RGB value we construct an image. Let me give you one more example of that I will take one more array for example I took array one and now I will take some other RGB values I will just write np dot zeros and I have here and I will also change and I will also change the width of this image width and height of this image I will just write hundred comma two hundred comma three and the data type would be same I will write dtype is equal to np dot uint that is unsigned int eight so that is done. So now I will assign some unique RGB values to this array so I will just write array one colon comma colon hundred I hope you are aware of this fact of list slicing in python we have already explained you in the previous videos so I will assign some unique RGB values as I said so I will assign two fifty five comma one twenty eight comma zero this is basically orange colour I will write here this is basically orange colour. And this is for the left side and for the right hand side I will write array one I will write colon comma hundred colon as we are talking about the right side so it should be hundred colon so I will write here zero zero comma two fifty five and this is basically blue colour so I will write blue colour here. And again what we will do here we will make an image out of this array so I will write img is equal to image dot from array form array from array now this time the array would be the array one and you should save this image image dot save and give another name to this image so I will just write test one dot png. So I think now our code is complete and now let us try to run this. Now let me check test one dot png so as you can see it as orange colour to the left hand side and blue colour to the right hand side so this is truly amazing we can construct images out of the RGB values so I will just repeat what we did here. First of all we need to import the numpy library as well as image library from pil package yes you have to import numpy image after doing that you need to construct an array, as I said image is basically a matrix so you need to construct a matrix, you need to construct an array here from that array you can construct an image here so I first of all I just took an array of zeros and I supplied dimensions here we supplied with an height here and three what is three denotes here? As we know each byte here would represent RGB values so there will be three bytes here so first byte will represent r second byte will g that is green and the third byte will represent the blue factor here and dtype what is dtype? Dtype is the data type which is unsigned here after that

we have constructed the array, now we need to construct an image out of this array so there is a direct function here in python and that is from array you will just write image dot from array and you need to supply the array as an parameter. So I supplied the array parameter here after that we need to save that image and as you know only zeros as RGB values corresponding on to black colour so we only had a black square here, small black square here because we gave the dimensions as a very less dimensions the width and height are very small that’s why we had a very small square here small square here so after that what we did was we took another array, array one in array one we supplied some dimensions some new dimensions hundred two hundred and three which I have already explained and then we supplied the data type, data type is as usual unsigned after that what we did was after we change the values of this array for changing the values we use list slicing, in the left part of the array we had orange colour and on the right part of the array we had blue colour after that again we need to construct an image out of this array so we used the function from array so we used from array image dot from array and we supplied array one here after that we save the image and here in this particular image we had orange on the left hand side, blue at the right hand side I hope this programming screen cast is clear to you and if you have any doubts we are there to help you please post on discussion form. Thank you.
AREA CALCULATION: DONT MEASURE 04
Welcome again as you have seen that we constructed an image from given RGB values now we will do the other way around suppose we are given an image and we need to find the RGB values of the dominant colours here so how can we do it? Well that is fairly easy so here will be taking our previous image only our test one dot png images png image in which we had orange colour at the left hand side and blue colour at the right hand side so I will just write the code in python on how to calculate the RGB values of a given image. So let us start with that. So first of all you need to import the image library so I will just do that from pil import image from pil import image after that what I will do here is I will open my image so I will just have im is equal to image dot open our image name is test one dot png so I will just write test one dot ong after that I will convert my image to RGB so how can you do that? You just covert you just write some variable here suppose I wrote RGB underscore im is equal to im dot convert so this will convert my im image to RGB values to matrix here so this is done now I need to calculate the particular RGB values so I will just write r comma g comma b is equal to RGB underscore im dot get pixel so get pixel is basically a function as I already explained that each cell in the matrix of an image represent a pixel and each pixel represented by a colour so they get pixel here only fetch the correct RGB values from the particular image they get pixel function will fetch the RGB values from the matrix of a given image so the given image here is test one dot png we already know the RGB values so let us check that whether it is right or not so I will just print the RGB values here I will write print r comma g comma b so let us try to run this. Yes! It is giving us the right values we had two fifty five, one twenty eight zero as the orange colour and zero, zero two fifty five as the blue colour so here we have the correct RGB values of the orange colour we have two fifty five, one twenty eight and zero now if I change the x and y coordinates here we can also get the blue colour so I will just write till hundred it was orange colour after that it was blue colour. So I will just write one fifty here so that we can get to know whether it is giving the correct RGB values of blue colour also so I will just run it again yes it is giving us the correct RGB values of blue colour too so we have zero, zero and two fifty five here so I will explain you again what I have done so far first of all we import image library from pil package after that we need to open that particular image so I will just wrote the function image dot open and in argument you need to pass the you need to pass the image name so we pass test one dot png after that you need to convert your image to RGB values to RGB matrix so you need to write im that is the variable name im dot convert and in bracket you need to pass RGB after that you need to print the particular RGB values so I stored these values in this three variables r for red, g for green and b for blue so I just wrote RGB is equal to RGB underscore im that is the converted image dot get pixel. The pixel is basically colour here so it would comprise of particular attributes that is RGB so after that you need to pass the x and y values here the x and y values would fetch a particular pixel and print its RGB value so then I wrote print RGB so as to check whether it is giving us the right Value or not so in this way in python you can find the RGB value of a image. This is the way which you can do by implementing in python with while there is an easy way too, there are many websites that are present on the internet in which you just have to upload your image and they will just give you the RGB value of the dominant colour present in your image. I will just show you one of the websites in fact there
 
are many you can refer many so I will just show you one as an example here. So as you see I have uploaded an images our images test one dot png and on the left hand side we have orange on right hand side we have blue so if I need to know the RGB values of the particular colour I will just over my mouse here on that particular colour and I get the particular RGB value these are basically called colour pickers so we have on orange we have the RGB values as two fifty five, one twenty eight, zero as we discussed earlier and on the blue one we have zero, zero two fifty five yes our program is giving us the same output as this so if you don’t want the pythonic way of calculating the RGB values of the image you can go by this method too but I will suggest you to write a code for this and then you will get to know what are the RGB values so I hope that this method is clear to you, clear to all of you we will be implementing this method we will be using this method in our forth coming programming screen cast relate to area calculation so if you have any doubts please, please, please post on discussion form. Thank you.
AREA CALCULATION: DONT MEASURE 05
Hello all, welcome to the programming screen cast of area calculation so first of all let me explain you how are we going to calculate the area of Punjab given area of India and how can we apply the method explained in the previous video here in python. So as you can see we have been given an image here in this image we have map of India in which the Punjab region has different colour and the rest of the region of India has different colour so please think about it how can we implement this using the method explain in the precious videos, now you are aware of this fact that you can find the RGB value of the image I hope that you are aware of this fact that you can find the RGB values of the image using python as well as the colour picker application any where available anywhere on the internet so as you see we have two different colours here so if I start putting random dots here I can find out which dots are placed in the Punjab region and which dots are placed in the India region, how can you find that? If the RGB value of the particular c and y coordinate is different is corresponding to this greyish part that means it is it lies in the Punjab region as well as if the dots that are placed here correspond to the black region the blackish region that means it lies in the India region so you can calculate the number of dots placed in the Punjab region as well as in the India region so I repeat here how can you do that, first of all you know how to calculate the RGB values of the particular image, so in this particular image we will be having two RGB values one corresponding to the greyish part and one corresponding to the blackish part so what will we do here, we will start putting random dots here will start taking the random x and y values here the corresponding x and y values if they have the RGB values that correspond to the grey colour that means they are present in the Punjab region and if the x and y values that are present in the blackish region and we can calculate the RGB value of that particular region and if it corresponds to the black region that means they are present in the India region so what we need to calculate here is, first of all we need to calculate the RGB value of these two colours of this grey colour and of this black colour and then we need to select the points select the x and y coordinates randomly and corresponding to these x and y coordinates we can calculate numbers of dots placed in the Punjab region and number of dots placed in the India region. So first of all let us calculate the RGB value, so I will be using the easy method here I will be using the colour picker application here as you see I have uploaded the image here so let me check the RGB value of the black region corresponds to sixty, sixty one, sixty and of this grey region corresponds to eighty, eighty one, eighty one so of this black region the RGB value is sixty, sixty one, sixty and of this grey region it is eighty, eighty one, eighty one so using these RGB values let us implement this in python so let me start with that so first of all what you need to do here is you need to import the scipy library here I will write import scipy dot misc I will be explaining you why are we importing this library and as an always we will be importing the image library from pil package so just write import image from pil after that you need to import numpy too I will just write import numpy as np and you also need to import the random so here I will just write import random so we have imported the required libraries now first step that we need to do here is we need to read this image so I will be introducing the new method here using the scipy dot misc library you can import you can read the images so I will just take a variable here img is equal to scipy dot misc dot read and our image name is map zero one dot png don’t worry we will be applying
 
you with this image we will be posting you this image so you just need to read this image after that you need to keep the track of the count of number of dots present in the Punjab region as well as the India region so I will be taking two variables here first of all it is count underscore Punjab is equal to zero and then count underscore IN that is India that is equal to zero so next what we need to do here is we also need to keep a track of count here you will be getting to know why are we taking count here now I will take a while loop and run it many number of times so that we can get the exact area for example I run it ten thousand number of times as I have already explained in the previous programming screen cast in the previous screen cast that we need to have many iterations here that’s why I took ten thousand let us see if this gives the right area or not, after that I need to select x and y variables randomly here what I need to do here is? I need to select x and y variables randomly here for selecting the x and y variables you need to know what is what are the dimensions of the image, yes you need to know what are the dimensions of the image so I will just go to the image and go to the image and try to find out what are its property so we have our image here map zero one dot png so I will just double click here and try to find out what are its properties so we have the image dimensions here that is two four eight one into two seven three six so we have the image dimensions here as two four eight one into two seven three six so according to that we will said the range for randomly selecting x and y values so let us write them in the code so I will just write random dot randint and we have zero comma two seven three five here and y is equal to random dot randint zero comma two four eight zero here two four eight one was their length and two seven three six was the breadth and in python we have the x and y dimensions reversed for example here we had the length has two four eight one but here the x value will the x part will be as two seven three five because it is reversed in python x is taken as the depth one and y is taken as the length one I hope this is clear to you so if this is not clear to you we commonly take x as the horizontal value and y as the vertical value in python it is reversed in case of images so x acts as a y value here x acts as a vertical thing here and y acts as a horizontal thing here so please keep this fact in mind while doing while processes image in python. So we have the x values the y values as we read this image, image scipy dot misc we also have the z dimension here while the z dimension is of no use to us because our image is 2d and it is not 3d so we will just take z is equal to zero here. After that we already know the RGB value of the grey region and of the black region so I will just write if img x y z is equal to is equal to sixty then it corresponds to the India region so I will just increase the counter of India here that is count is equal to count underscore n plus one and I also increase the count here count is equal to count plus one else what do you need to do here is else if the RGB value corresponds to the Punjab region the grey region what we will write here x y z is equal to equal to righty here, so then we need to increase the count of Punjab region so you just write count underscore pun is equal to count underscore pun plus one and you need to also increase the count value, count is equal to count plus one so now we have number of dots placed in the India region number of dots placed in the Punjab region now what you have to do here is, you need to calculate the area of Punjab so we will go by our method I will write area of Punjab is equal to count of Punjab region divided by count of India region into the exact area of India so I will be taking the exact area here and that is three two eight seven three two eight seven two six three, three two eight seven two six three and I will now print this particular variable area underscore Punjab so now let me try to run this and see whether

this is giving the right answer or not and if it is not giving the right answer so will have to check whether increase in number of iterations will help this method or not so I will just run it, we need to save it so I will just write ar dot py let me try to run it so there is some problem here let me try to check it is not read it is basically I am read it is not read basically I am read please note this fact here so I will just try to run it here again so we have the area of Punjab as four eight zero two three but actually the area of Punjab is five zero three six two so there is some error here so let me try to increase the iterations so I will increase the iterations to one lack so let me try to run it again it will take some time because the iterations have been increased so now we have five four zero nine six the error here is less earlier we had around four thousand error now we have around two thousand error so if you keep on running this particular program you will get some value near to the area of Punjab. Ok, since it is a randomise method this can’t give you the exact amount the exact area but this will give you the area that is very very close to the area of Punjab. So we will just run it again let me run it again it is now four nine eight eight nine run it again it is five two three six four oh my god this is very very close to the area of Punjab it is somewhat two thousand it is somewhat two thousand away from the actual value you can check that online, what is the area of Punjab and you can figure out and this is very very close it has only one thousand difference the area of Punjab is basically five zero three six two so, it is very very close to this particular value so you must be having the question that why are we getting the different values every time please note the fact that we are calculating we are taking x and y as random values so we don’t know the ratio count of Punjab divided by count of India the, we don’t know what this ratio will give us so if this ratio is accurate then only the area of Punjab will be accurate so we need to increase the number of iterations so has we get more and more x and y coordinates and we get a clear picture we get the correct value of area of Punjab ok so since this is a randomised method the answer the solution the value would be different for different times for different number of runs so as you keep on running this algorithm you will get different different answers but only but one thing is sure about it that this will give you area that will be very very close to the actual area of Punjab the error would be very very less. I hope this programming screen cast was useful to you guys I will be coming up with another method of how can we calculate this the logic is somewhat same but will be telling you one another method of how can you calculate the area of Punjab if you are given area of India. Thank you.
