INTRODUCTION TO ANACONDA
In the last week you got to know what is programming all about, we all saw that programming can indeed be fun. We showed several nice examples on scratch asked you to create your own scratch programmes, I am sure many of you tried doing it. Let us now switch modes and start learning python. Python isn’t as easy as scratch but we assure you that we will certainly make is easy and interesting to you. So get your cup of tea pen paper and computers ready let’s start.
Hi everyone on this video we will see how to download anaconda. Anaconda is a tool to which you can write your programmes in python and even combine it literally, so why we are suggesting anaconda? Because, anaconda comes with a lot of libraries so you don’t have to install those libraries again or those packages again so it is very user friendly for beginners so in this course throughout we will be using anaconda only and with anaconda there comes an ide know as spyder so we will be using spyder, so let’s see this.
INSTALLATION OF ANACONDA
So let me just type on Google anaconda ok, type anaconda python, so it is comes under the snake to and python ok, so you can see the link, this is the link which is anaconda, you can click here so I will just type url ok, huh you can sign up here also that you get news letter and new versions if there release anything you will get a notification also that so just go to the download anaconda and click on it, ok you can see you can download it on windows, you can download it on Mac and even Linux so today I am going to install the anaconda on windows ten so you can easily download it by following the same instructions which I am going to provide you though this video, you can download it on Linux also and Mac also so let me go to the windows version ok, just click on it ok you can see the anaconda 5.2 is there for windows installer, there are two types of version python 3.6 version and python 2.7 version. In this course we will be using python 3 or 3.x I mean 3 point any of the released version, so we will like you to install the python 3.6 version rather than python 2.7 versions even though the difference is very less some syntax literally syntax differences are in 2.7 and 3.6 version but there are some libraries which are compatible in 3.6 version and not compatible in 2.7 version so in this course we would like you to download the 3.6 version just click on this download button, I already downloaded this in my computer so I will just check my, I will go to the download ok, So you can see anaconda 3.5 is already there so I will just double click on it ok so just make it I agree it’s up to you what you want, Just me or all the users I am doing for just me ok you can check where you want to install the anaconda, you can make it as a default also as default it goes to the c drive so it’s up to you so I will use the default version, I will go there just install it, it will take some time.
INTRODUCTION TO SPYDER
Ok guys you can see that the installation is completed so I just press next, I don’t want Microsoft visual code so I will skip this you can check this read manual how to learn, how to get started with anaconda? So let’s see this what they provide. So getting started with anaconda can go through all these things ok? You can check how to start anaconda I mean spyder id on windows and Linux and Mac other operative system and you can learn more about anaconda cloud, so this is done so I will search here go to the search pad and type spyder so just click it. So you can see the spyder this, I opened this spyder IDE, this part is the part where I write the programme and you can see this name, this name is the name of my programme so I can change this for example what I will do, start save as let say and I save it as my first.py ok, ok? This part is the part where you can see the console so you can see here it’s written I python console so in this console you can mostly you will get all the outputs related things, this part is the part where you can see the variables and how they are, how and the files another we will discuss. Variable means how they are changing and how? What values they are taking it so we will learn about this in other videos and you should know that in the python console you can it works as the interpreter console so you can do some kind of programming also example if I write here two plus three it will give me five because it interprets here it’s not like other languages like C, C++ and java where you have to compile it first then you have to run it, it works as interpreter and line well and interprets, in console you can write those things ok, let me just write a simple command of print here ok and let me show how to run this so I just write print ok and in the columns my first programme ok and you save it, here you can see the run button just click on it yes run it, my first programme. So this is how you do your programming, let me do something some other stuff, this erase it and let me just create a simple variable ok, “a” is equal to ten which means “a” is a just visualise it as a bucket containing lets say ten cookies or a class which contain or a jar which contain ten cookies ok? Let me create another bucket or a jar containing thirteen cookies let’s say ok, now I want to create a jar in C I want to add these add a number of cookies of which representing A and which representing B in the C so I want C as the C should contain all the cookies which representing A plus all the cookies representing B so I will just write A and cookies in Bok I will save this now I want to print cookies in C let’s see, cookies in C it should come twenty three the best thing about thing is you can revise the thing what are the variables you are created, you can see those variables, what represents in the console also write here a only and see a it will show ten, and b show thirteen and c show twenty three and here you can see all the variables that helped in created a of type integer will see about in other videos, a is of integer type and value it has is ten, b is also integer and maybe is thirteen and c is also integer and value is thirty three so these are the basics stuffs you can print, so you can print here also hi, my name is amit verma ok so print, print it print directly here so this videos was about just installation of anaconda on windows so just follow the same step on Mac if you are using Mac operation system or if you are using Linux operating system then the instructions are same just go to the anaconda cloud download the latest version, make sure you know the architecture for example I take I downloaded the anaconda python
 
3.6 with 64 bit so you should know the architecture of your operating system, if it is 64 bit you can download 64 and 32 bit both but if it is a 32 bit you have to download the 32 bit version only so make sure you know the architecture and this is pretty much so I just wanted you guys to see how to download the anaconda, we all in all the videos we will be using the spyder ide only, it is very easy you can import, it has a lot of libraries present so you don’t have to download some libraries by yourself, if you just download python open source library which comes in the python you have to download it again, So independently you need to download those packages so with anaconda you do not have to do that because it comes with so all those library, most of the library some of the libraries you might have to download and if you have to download those libraries we will tell you, how to download it, so this was it please if you find any problem regarding installation of this anaconda please post it on forum we will help you we will also provide a documentation how to download it on Mac, widows and Linux so yeah thank you.
PRINTING STATEMENTS IN PYTHON
I have now opened a spyder terminal without before going further let us look at some basic functionalities of this interface off course we told you a whole lot about anaconda installation just now I will just tell you one fact that will be helpful for me to teach you more of python, this is called a console where I can check some commands and this is the place where I type my python code, you will soon get familiarized with these things don’t worry if you don’t understand completely, what I will do is in the interest of making the video visible to you all I will maximise this you can also do it by going to view and then saying maximise current pane, current pane means the pin where you all write now, you click on it, it becomes full like this and if you want to get back to its normal state you can go to view and say restore current pane ok, for the time being I will maximise this, maximised it increasing the font and then let’s start. We saw what are variables I can say ‘a’ equals ten, ‘b’ equals twenty and then say ‘c’ equals ‘a plus b’ and then I can print what is in ‘c’, Its thirty correct ‘c’ was ‘a plus b’ and see now when you print what is in ‘c’ this command print says what is in ‘c’ display it, if I say show ‘c’, it will not show anything it will show you some weird stuff like this because python only recognises the word print it doesn’t recognise the word show, I cannot simply say what is in ‘c’? It will not know what we are talking right? There is a particular way of saying something print ‘c’ is the way of saying, ok it shows thirty now I can simply say ‘c’ also it will say thirty but it’s a good practice to say print of ‘c’ always, you will know why very soon. Now if I say ‘x’ is equal to within quotes sudarshan and I say “print x” just the way I said print ‘c’, I say print ‘x’ it will show what ever in ‘x’, so you must be wondering why should I say print ‘x’, I can directly type sudarshan here, if your point is to display sudarshan, simply type sudarshan here now note this whenever we are trying to teach you something we will use a very silly example that is in the interest of teaching it is in no way indication of the importance of a command so print ‘x’ displays sudarshan am just trying to illustrate what print does. I am not telling you the exact usage of the print command, exact usage will come next.
UNDERSTANDING VARIABLES IN PYTHON
You just now saw what print does, it isn’t just this let us see more of it now. Now I have three t a s in my course now my first t a let me call it t one is amit, t one equal amit, when I say t1 it will show amit as you can see ok, and my second t a s name is simran and my third t a s name is vidya. Now I have t1 t2 and t3 now see what I am going to do, no I am going to say print hello t1 inside quotes I am going to put t1 and then I am going to close and guess what will happen, it will say hello t1 why? Whatever you put within in the quotes it will simply show whatever is inside that’s it but if I say print hello and then close the quotes and then put a comma and then say t1 close the bracket and then say enter you see what happen, you probably can guess what is happening here I need not explain, it saying hello followed by whatever was told in t1, what was told in t1? Amit was told in t1. So it is simply saying hello amit, if I were to say print hello t2, it will say hello simran, where to say print hello don’t worry about what comes here it is a help look up on how print command works, so please ignore this, This is too much for you to understand or even see what is written here so just ignore this thing that is coming in here, so let we say “hello” comma t3 it will say hello vidhya ok, there are my t a s, I am the instructor if I say I equals sudarshan and now if I say print I it will simply print sudarshan, if I say print hello I it will say hello sudarshan ok? If I say print, see I can use up arrow to go to the precious command, I just said up arrow, up arrow there are four arrows you see up, down, left, right? If I press up it will goes to the precious command, previous command. If I again press up arrow it goes to this previous command it is print of I see and then the previous and then the previous I will be using this quite often don’t get confused don’t be worried how I am able to type something very quickly I am just using this is called the history look up, I am just going and seeing the history so what if I say print hello t1, t2, t3 what will it display? Let us see what it will display. So it says hello amit, simran vidhya because t1 t2 t3 are amit, simran and vidhya. Now let’s do something print hello t1, t2, t3and then comma how are you all doing, how are you all doing today? Then I close again it is self explanatory isn’t it? You now know what this does, it simply says hello amit simran vidhya how are you all doing today? See programming is all about this, if I now realise that t1 is amit but amit said “sir please display my full name” my full name is amit verma then I will say t1 is equal to amit underscore verma let’s say I put it like this ok? Now when I say print t1, it says amit verma now you can wonder what happened to the precious t1 which was actually amit, it is over written by that I mean whatever you assign the latest t1 is amit verma will be the latest value ok? If now I say t1 is equal to let say India, t1 print t1 will give you India, amit verma is now gone. Correct? Ok. So let me now get back amit verma up arrow up arrow up arrow up arrow t1 is equal to amit verma and what I will do is I will display this once again, up arrow up arrow up arrow huh! Hello t1 t2 t3 how are you all doing? Its look at the output here it was hello amit simran vidhya how are you all doing? Now t1 has become amit verma this t1 is now amit verma, so it will say hello amit verma simran and vidhya, simran vidhya how are you all doing today? See hello amit verma simran vidhya how are you all doing today? Correct, now let me enhance slightly, I would want to put a “and” here after t1 t2 I want to put “and” right? when you have three names
 
after two names you have to put and, and then after hello amit verma simran vidhya, I want to put a full stop, so I will put a full stop here before how starts correct? This, look at this command properly, look at this entire command properly let me highlight it for you, look at this entire command, what am I trying to do here, I am simply saying “hello t1 t2 and t3 full stop how are you all doing today?” Perfect it says “hello amit verma simran and vidhya how are you all doing today?” Amazing now you understand how print command works and how you can club variables with print command, let us conclude this discussion with a very small exercise. I say age is equal to thirty enter ok? Print the number you entered was put age and close it will say the number you entered was thirty, now if you change age to some forty and then print it will say entered was forty correct? Now I will say “age” whatever it was, what was it? Print age will tell you what age was, age was forty. Why not thirty? Because you wrote it once again, once you write age equals forty the latest assignment for age will be taken, by assignment is what I mean forty gets stored in this variable called age ok. If I say age equals age plus one this is a little worry some what does one mean by age equal age plus one, python is a particular way of functioning? When someone says age equals age plus one python simply takes the age value and add one to it and assigns the new value to this namely age print age will show you forty one. Correct? Don’t worry so much about what these variables are? You will become very clear with them with time ok? Variable is more like a house where you store some entity right? You store you keep book in a cub board right? a variable is like a cub board and your book is like a value that you assigning see it that way it will become handy to you to call age and the value of age whatever it is right now forty one will be ready for your reference right? so don’t worry even if you didn’t understand if you understood only fifty percent of what I taught still you are through with understanding good amount of python in the forth coming lectures.
EXECUTING A SEQUENCE OF INSTRUCTIONS IN THE CONSOLE
So we saw what is print command and let us do something, let us use it properly. When I say a equals one and then print a, you get one. When I say a equals a plus one it means you are incrementing a by one so what will happen to a? It will become two. I again say ‘a’ equals ‘a plus one’ and then I say ‘a’ becomes three, ‘a’ equals ‘a plus one’ and then ‘a’ equals to four and so on correct? You now follow what is print command very well ok, so now I can actually say ‘a’ equals ‘a plus’ one and then put a colon and then say print of a these two commands gets executed simultaneously firstly it will as good as executing the command and then executing this command so if I type the same thing and plus enter it will display six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve and so on ok, let me clear the screen by typing clear on now a equals one once again print a which will make it print one, now look at this a equals a plus one print ‘a’ again, I put a colon ok, another this is semi colon not colon sorry and then I say ‘a’ equals ‘a plus one’ once again and I put a semi colon and say print ‘a’ once again, again a semi colon ‘a’ equals ‘a plus one’ then I say print ‘a’ what is this do? It will simply executes all these commands in a sequence enter, two three four why because ‘a’ was already one I incremented it by one it became two and then it printed ‘a’ and so on ok? So what I should do is I should probably print a, a equals one assign that and then print a and then put a semi colon and then increment a and so on now this is a sequence of instructions do you understand that, a equals one is the first thing assign a to one in plain English this what happening, assign ‘a’ assign one to a not a to one I am sorry don’t assign ‘a’ to one assign, you assign one to ‘a’ and then you print what is in a and then again you make a become one more that’s what this means, sir why does we write it as a equal a plus one that’s the convention, you must learn it that way, this is how you can talk to python ok? ‘a’ equals ‘a plus one’ incremented, print ‘a’ now, now ‘a’ will be displayed as two, ‘a’ equals ‘a plus one’ now ‘a’ becomes three now, ‘a’ will be printed as three, a equals ‘a plus one’, ‘a’ becomes four then ‘a’ will be printed as four, perfect let’s execute this and see this is what it happens, it displays hip hip hurray! We are done. It says one, two, three, and four you have learnt one of the important aspects of python, important aspects of programming in general, and programming is all about executing a sequence of instructions to the computer. Telling the computer what to do right? Ok. Perfect. So now you understand how to use print command, what are variables, and how you can type something in a sequence?
WRITING YOUR FIRST PROGRAM
It is now time to learn a new command, please note that print command just we showed you right now it is used to display something meaning output something to the screen your monitor right? Now let us learn how to take something as input from your keyboard by writing a piece of code.
I have now opened a spyder terminal as you can see here is my what is called the console where you can type your code, here is my place where I can type my code, what do I mean by that. Let me remove whatever is present here, once you become a sufficient programmer you can, you will understand what was present and what I am deleting makes about documenting your code anyway let’s not worry about it. Now look at I can now say a equals one, a equals a plus one and then after a equals one I say print a and then after a equals a plus one I will say print a ok now I want this to be executed all at once. This is equivalent to remember we just console we were trying to type something in the previous discussion a equals one print a, this is same as a equals one put a semi colon and then say print a correct? A equals one print a and then a equals a plus one and then print a will simply execute all these things at once this can be given here or the same thing will also be given here, when you give here you must execute this code by going to the menu click on run and then click on run, it will first ask me to save this file, it is just like saving your simple ms word file I will type print dot py, it should always have py extension here like how you are ms word files have doc extension and note pads file have docs txt extension, your python has dot py extension click on save wherever you want to save and now when you go to run and say run it will run you and see the answer one and two is the answer it says running this particular file ok, let me write more, a equals a plus one and then print a ok, we will copy paste this and then repeat this again and again, perfect one this is so much fun I want to see what exactly happens now from here I planned to execute it, so how many times we should print a? Once twice three four five times six times seven times eight times and nine times let’s make it ten times now, now what do you expect to be the output? It should have one two three four five six seven eight nine ten. Correct? Let’s see if this is what does, go to run and click on run, you will get se perfect one two three four five six seven eight nine ten what did you learn just now? You can write a sequence of using semi colon here I will show you wait, where was that? Here. Like this you can type or you can type it like this or even you can save it for future reference right? You can save this file here is your programme what does a programme do? Assign one to the variable a and print variable a, as I told you variable is more like an entity which stores a value, a now has one but the same a is now incremented by one and then you print a and then you increment a by one print a and so on, so where minimum pre requisites is expected in this course and many of you do not know anything about programming, so all of you who is seeing programming for the first time will find this lessons very self explanatory and people who knows some programming already might be getting bored because we are talking about basics but very soon you will see that we will pace up and cover the whole of python and get
 
into some really cool computing applications so please tolerate our simplicity for the next few lecture videos.
TAKING INPUTS FROM THE USER
All right so I am gonna teach you people how to take input from the computer, what do we mean by this? I will illustrate with an example. Firstly let us make a full screen then look at this print what is your name? Ok, it shows what is your name? And then I say n equals input what is your name? Same thing I am going to put here. This will also say what is your name? But it will wait for you to type for your name. See what happens I say enter see it is saying what is your name and you see the cursor blinking here, do you see the cursor blinking here right? I will type sudarshan, now it stops. You know what it has done right now, it has taken sudarshan and as assigned sudarshan to n how do you know that? Say print n and there you are sudarshan ok if I say n equals input what your name is? And I type iit underscore Ropar and I say print n, it prints iit Ropar ok? Let me put this to use now I hope, you all understood what we are doing here, correct? So, let me go to view and then restore current pane and I have this ok, so let me now write a code for this. Print, I need not print I directly say n equals input what is your name? And whatever you input I will then say print hello n can you stare at these two lines and tell me what this does? Ok let us run and see that is the best part about programming. If it is hard for you to guess what something will do you can run and see what it does? So if I we may guess it will ask you to type your name and assign that name to n and it will say hello n depending on whatever name you are going to type run and its asking me for your name, what is your name? I will type let’s say India, my name is India. Tats it, it says hello India. Correct ok, let’s add some more spice to it I will say print hello n how are you n print I hope life is treating n well so what happens, let us save this first run this and see what happens. It says again what is your name? I will type my original name sudarshan, what should it now say hello sudarshan how are you sudarshan I hope, life is treating sudarshan well I am very bad at punctuation so let me correct those things right now. Dot here and how are you sudarshan after that I need to put a question mark hello n and then exclamation may be correct? What is your name as a question mark? Right? Now let me save this and run this. What is your name? I say sudarshan. And it says hello sudarshan exclamation how are you sudarshan question mark I hope life is treating sudarshan well you see what we did, if instead of sudarshan I were to input something else wish let me try now. Let me go to run and then say run its asking me for name I will take some other name ok, I will type ram, what is your name? Ram. How are you ram? I hope life is treating ram well, now isn’t that interesting you type something and that is put as a place holder in many places and there is a customised message for that person. Ok? Watch this video couple of times to get a hang off what we are trying to say this is going to be important, we are going to take whole lot of input from users and should understand how that is done.
DISCOUNT CALCULATION
Imagine I walk into a restaurant or let say shop where there is a discount of ten percent which means if you buy something for hundred rupees you actually got to pay only ninety rupees, if you buy something for hundred and fifty rupees you going to pay only one thirty five rupees so you will get a discount of ten percent. Which means whatever is the price you should multiply by point nine? So now let us write a programme which takes as input the cost and then tells you the price after discount basically it must simply multiply by point nine and then give you the answer. Ok now how do I go about this let me teach you something. Print, what is the cost? Alright? What is the cost? And you enter something what should that be cost c is cost c equals input I will say what is the cost? This is how it is done right? End a bracket like this and it will wait for you to enter. When I press one fifty it will takes c as one fifty see print c I am sorry, print within bracket c correct? Now I will say print, let’s say answer is equal to c times point nine. It is throwing some error you see you must understand this. Whenever we ask for c the c you wrote one fifty but the computer seized it as, it doesn’t see it as a number it sees it as what it called string. Now assume your is like your vehicle can only take diesel it cannot take petrol, if you fill petrol you are doing a huge mistake, you probably making your vehicle unusable correct? So this is now trigged as string on string you cannot do any kind of mathematical operations, there is a way to handle this. What you must do, you must convert the string to a number, if this done by the following way. We say d equals hint of c now print d, this will be a number now this you can do answer equals d times point zero point nine and now if you print answer it will have one three five, if you find it difficult what I said let me start from the beginning ok? So let me clear the screen. I say c equals input right input enter the cost of the item and then you will enter something let say two hundred ok now print c is two hundred you cannot do any addition or subtraction on the c now that’s how it is, you might be wondering why? Now all these programming languages comes with its own way of handling, you probably you are wondering how difficulties it to ensure that we the people who made python gave us this facility of manipulating c directly why should we do this? But this is the standard. What should we do? We should say d equals convert this to integer that’s the command for it int of c a note if you say d equals integer of c it will show weird error like this, name integer is not defined, if you can guess it is just saying that I don’t know, what do you mean by integer? When I say d equals int it knows. It converts the value in c on to an integer like value, so d is now assigned the value two hundred, this two hundred is in d and since it’s an integer it is ready to take your arithmetic operations so you can do math on it. So what is my math? Answer will be zero point nine times please note you should put a star here that’s the multiplication symbol not your typical x you do in school days ok, if you do that it will show an error, you put an star here, star is on your key board it’s just on top of the number eight. Point nine times d that the answer now I will print answer it will give you one eighty is the discounted price after removing ten percent from what you input. Now what is our job? Our job right now would be to write a code for this for an entire thing how do we go about? Print hI how are you doing? HI how are you, let us compute the final price after discount we say enter right? What is that? C equals input enter the cost of the item and then
 
you should do d equals int of c then you should finally say answer is equal to zero point nine times d and finally you must say print the cost after discount is close the colon comma say answer and there you are, this will do everything that will wanted to do. First it will print hi how are you etc and then it will say enter the cost, you will enter whatever you enter goes to c and then d will be a convert of c, you are converting the petrol car to the diesel car it’s something like that ok so that you can you can write the way you want. Ahh see there is a difference between a diesel engine and a petrol engine you cannot treat one like the other correct? So d equals integer of c, so now d becomes a integer variable you can do all sorts of mathematical operations on it I told you this how python works so you should not ask lot questions there ha ha! Right? So answer is equal to zero point nine times d if you don’t understand this is how you compute discount right? Ninety percent of the original value is what you get by ten percent discount if you need a pen and paper to work this out but trust me my math is decent enough that I can tell you that this is the formula. Answer equals point nine times d so then finally I print the cost after discount is the answer let us see what happens to this code, go to run and then run this, this is short cut as well f5 to run it, I am doing it the age old way don’t call me a bad programmer there are lot of nice ways in which you can run this code but I don’t like using a portal like this I like doing it on the command prompt but to make you understand I am using it the old school way so run. Hi how are you? Let us complete the final price of the discount enter the cost; I bought something for thousand rupees, One thousand rupees so what will be my discount? Ten percent gone should be nine hundred let’s see and I press enter whoo! Here you are nine hundred. Do you see the sped with the chit computed nine hundred now that is computers that is programming. You write in such a long way what it should do and it executes in like boom! A fraction of a second and that is what makes programming interest. So what did you just now learn? You learn how to write a piece of code to compute the final discount price right? sky is the limit go ahead see this video again and try to write a code which takes a value and then tells you what will happen if you were to sell this item with fifteen percent profit which means if you take something for hundred rupees and you sell it for hundred and fifteen rupees go ahead write the code and see if it works fine or not?
MOTIVATION TO IF CONDITION
Let us now see how to instruct your computer to understand your “if conditions” using python. I keep repeating the same thing again and again please don’t feel bugged this is very important, it takes time for you to understand everything right? you might be wondering why is he talking so much about if, why should I worry about traffic signals and how will that be useful in computers. You will soon see as the weeks pass by how will be using this “if condition” the way we keep saying hi to your friends every now and then you see them, you will keep using this if condition to your computer whenever you are programming you would be that frequent is noted.
A REMINDER ON HOW TO DEAL WITH NUMBERS
So now you know how to take user input in python now let us try to perform some operations on the input and see what happens?
Ok so now let’s start, let me now type print statement print hi how are you? Just like that I am typing this ok, then I am going to take my choice to be equal to input please enter your choice ok, what will happen? Let me run and see. so as I told you, you can go to run and then run and you can always run by this short cut key mentioned here which is f5 on my machine, it can be different on your machine too depending upon what you are using an apple computer it will be different, if you are using a windows machine it will be different and if you are using a Linux machine it will be different. If you don’t understand don’t worry all that you should do is you should see what key board, what key is given here and you should press that that’s one way of executing, clicking on run is another way there is yet another way which is this button here right? Ok. So now let me press this button here. It asks this let say run and it says ho how are you here you see that, let me zoom, hi how are you here and it says please enter your choice. I will write ten so the choice is taken as ten but I don’t get to know what my choice is so what I should do for that is say print c that’s it again run this it will say, hi how are you please enter your choice I will say ten it will print ten. Correct? Now I will say if my, see you know what? Your c will always be a string here ok? What do I mean by that? Let me delete this and spend some time here and tell you what I am trying to say. When I say print c here it will show ten. Let me do one thing, if I say, c plus 2 it throws a error, I told you because c will be c in as a string it is not seen as an number ok, I will show you something more funny when I say c into five ok? It will then tell you its true colour you know c into five will means if c is ten c into five is ten ten ten ten now ha ha ha how funny is that? So c into five according to me is fifty when c is ten. As I told you I am going to repeat this more often than what you can consider as acceptable computers are very dumb they will not understand, I repeat computers are very dumb you must precisely tell them what you want the computer to do? If you simply say c into ten it will print ten ten ten ten times because c is a string according to the computer it sees as a string for that you convert it to the integer by integer I mean a number you must give this command, d is equal to int of c what is this mean? It means c was a string when I entered like this using this command but I am converting that into integer and the resultant int is an integer by integer you mean a number. The resulting number will be stored in d when I say this now see the magic. When I say d into five what do you expect? See it says fifty very good! It’s a nice computer. I mean it listens to what I say but it is bad enough that it is not smart enough that it can figure out what I am trying to say. If I say c into ten it will put ten ten ten ten ten times, only when I convert that to a number will it give me the right answer right, initially you see it threw of an error when I said c plus two that’s because c was a string. If I say d plus two it will say twelve. Correct? Perfect.
UNDRSTANDING IF CONDITION’S WORKING
So what I will do here is I will go here please enter your choice c is entered I will print c and I will say d equals int of c, which means now d will be, let me remove this, this is not required why should I print c. Directly say d equals int o f c now look at what I am going to do next if d is equal to one colon enter print, you entered one that’s it. And now I will run this you probably have no clue what I wrote here this is doesn’t sound like English, this doesn’t sound like mathematics it doesn’t sound like any language and you are very bugged I know it but stay patience let’s see what this does. Run hi how are you please enter your choice I say one and it says you entered one ok let me figure out what this is doing? I will repeat this once again run enter your choice I will press two and choose nothing. Remember what we did with our scratch programme, yes! You do remember right? Look at this we used set c equals something and then we said if c equals something then do something c equals two c equals three then something. Similarly, similarly I am trying to do it by using python right now. Python is not as beautiful as scratch where we can simply drag and drop stuff here; you need to do some work. What is that work? You should type things that you want, what do you mean by that? Look at this. I say if d is equal to two then print you enter the number two, whatever you put here it will put, if I if I replace this by my name it will display my name now let me run this. Please enter your choice I say one it says you entered one let me run this once again. I say my choice enter your choice I say two it will say you entered the number two correct? Let me do more of this. If d is equal to three then say, what should I say? Print you entered the number three no that’s very boring I will say I am tired, I am tired just like that for fun I am saying something else here so let me run this. But my choice is used to be one it says you entered one, if my choice happens to be two it says you entered the number two and if your choice happens to be three it will say you entered three! No that’s because that’s not what I am saying here as I told you the computers that you are that that you are using is so dumb it will just do same time very faithfully so it will just do what you are asking it to do not more not less so it will actually say ahhh I am tired so now it’s very clear to you how if loop works in python how word of warning, you should type if within brackets only you should type let’s say d is equal to one please note it is not one equal in python it is two equals. You can ask me in scratch you put one equal here why are you sir putting two equals here? My friend English is different from, Hindi is different from, German is different from, Sanskrit is different from, Tamil, Telugu, kannada, you name it all this languages are different, they come with their own style and you must stick to that style otherwise the computer will slap you what do I mean by that? I will tell you what I mean by that. Instead of print if I say print you see and you run here it will say please enter your choice I will say one and you see name prnt is not defined it got confused basically, it will show u a lot of unwanted stuff these scary stuff, you start wondering you will probably close your laptop and run away. All these entries you know, don’t worry about them it quite advanced, computer gets confused how to react so it will throw up all these unwanted text so we should be very careful what to say and what not to say. Let me write it back to print and then click, it saying please enter your choice I enter one it does show you, you entered one.
REALISING THE IMPORTANCE OF SYNTAX AND INDENTATION
Ok, so coming back two equalities are important and after this there should be a colon, if there is no colon it will behave weirdly look at this I have removed colon right now I am running it, see invalid syntax it is even showing these arrows saying that ahh the syntax invalid syntax. The complicated word don’t worry about what this means? It means computer is instead of angry with you for having, made a mistake. It says something is wrong here, what is wrong here? You should put a colon here. Why? Because that’s how python works and then you come to the next line, you see you have printed, what, why have I left this space here? Let me not leave this space here and then let me execute. You see expected and indented block ahhh whatever that means if you dint understand don’t worry you are not alone it is very difficult to make out what the computer says whenever it is angrily scolding you this is called compilation error and even its also complicated so don’t worry all I mean is it is not very happy so that’s because python expects you to give this space here and maintain that space everywhere whenever you are inside a if loop like this what do I mean? Let’s go back to the scratch and look at this if something is true then you execute this, you see you can even put statements here go to looks and say you put hello here then it will say then you make this one so that its comes here double click its goes to here good morning for five seconds, five seconds over? Yeah over. Now hello for two seconds and then it will stop. You saw what happened? It will come inside and execute these two things whatever is within this yellow if loop similarly in python whatever is indented it will show. What do I mean by this? I will come here and I say “print” so you are doing well I see I will type this now I will execute this ok? Now always it asks for your choice and says one it will come inside and what do you expect it does. It execute these two things this is like in scratch whatever is inside this yellow thing is equivalent to whatever is written after providing this space in multiple lines after it. So when I do this and say enter you entered one so you are doing well I see, it says everything that is here it will not say anything in the next line, it will not say anything in the next line you must note this. Ok so that completes what is a if loop as end always things are not as easy as simply watching what I do and then nodding your head, right? You should try writing this code all by yourself exactly what I did here, you should repeat it; you should also do more than that ok? And please note these things come by practice. In the forth coming weeks we will be using “if” almost every single program will have if some where here or there you will get used to it very soon it’s all a matter of time. Thank you all.
INTRODUCTION TO LOOPS
Observe what I am going to do now, I am going to say print hi how are you ok? And I am going to type this many times, hi how are you ahh I am going to just copy pasting this so let me copy this and then paste this. You all know what is copy pasting right? ok you all have studied ms word note pad and things like that in fact even on your on your cell phones these days you have copy paste facility ok so I can as many times I want so you see I have type this ten times now when I run this code its says ‘hi how are you’, ‘hi how are you’ ten times ah what if I wants this to be displayed hundred times? Remember we discussed something similar to this on scratch right? You recollected right? We introduced you to what is called the looping structures, How to repeat a task many times, how to instruct the computer to repeat a task many times? I am gonna do that right now just observe this ten time if I were to do this hundred times I must copy paste this hundred times that’s a very tds task so python has a nice way to do this. Let me show you how it’s done. For I in range ten what does it mean? Don’t worry I will tell you print ‘hi how is everything’ or maybe I should comma here I should precise ok good hi, ‘how is everything’ and I question mark here, my English is bad, ok so for I range ten print Hi, how is everything? What does this do? This sounds again very weird remember the ‘if’ statement we wrote something and then we put a colon here right similarly we write for I in range ten print hi, how is everything? There with my speed don’t worry let’s see what happens when we execute this and then I explain what exactly this is doing ok? So wow see what happened it was so fast you people didn’t probably observe it. Hi how are you is how I typed it ten times but here hi how is everything? Is displayed ten times how did this happen? Let’s observe. So I is a variable by now you all know what is a variable you have done it in scratch we have been talking about it in python so I becomes a variable in range ten means this in English this statement means create a variable I range ten means start assigning the values zero, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine to I. I repeat for I in range ten means assign zero to I come execute this statement, assign one to I come execute this statement ok assign two to I come execute this statement, three to I execute this statement and so on right? Perfect. So I varies from zero to nine and hi, how is everything? Is displayed ten times. Confusing? Don’t worry as and always practice makes a person perfect let’s practice more of this forward. For let me remove this delete for I in range five print I now this will teach you how for loops works. Ok, let me run this, what is happening? Zero one two three four I variable takes the value zero one two three four, whatever you put here it’s starts from zero and comes five numbers ad one at a time is assign to i. And then that particular value of I gets printed here this is zero one two three four so where to say ten here you guessed it right, it will say zero one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine if I say look at this print hi you are in number let say close it comma hi what does it do? Let’s see. huh ah you are in number zero, you are in number one, you are in number two, you are in number three, you are in number four and so on right? Perfect. This makes it very clear to you what we are doing. Ok, let me display the multiples of two, how do I do that? I will delete everything let me start from beginning. For I in range ten colon and then you should put a tab here I should come here and tab is because you cannot start from here, you should always start from here. Ok. So
 
let me type print I will simply say I into two, you know what this does? This will simply display your two tables. Let me click this then and observe what happens here. Run and boom! Zero, two, four, six, eight, ten, twelve, fourteen, sixteen, eighteen but we knew two tables till twenty that’s because, I in range ten means zero, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine. The last number will be nine, so nine times two will be eighteen that’s why it is stopping at eighteen, if you want it to stop at twenty you should remove this and put eleven here and now look at the magic so its starts from zero and goes till twenty. Correct? Ok Perfect. That’s about for loops observe them slowly patiently practice a few problems and you lead through. What we will now do is we will go ahead and discuss more of for loops so it will become very familiar to you ok, it is a this point that you must understand everything of what I have said about for loops ok so take a pause observe the video once again if you want, write a few programmes and let us see more of for loops in the forth coming lectures.
LOOPS: SUM OF NUMBERS
Ok, let us now use for loop to do some very basic mathematics, are the reason why am doing this basic math with for loop is to teach you how to use for loop ok? Let me ask you this question. What is one plus two? Off course three. What is one plus two plus three? It is six. One plus, two plus, three plus, four plus, five plus, six plus, seven plus, eight plus, nine plus, ten what is it? It is fifty five. Let me use a for loop to do this ok? To add the first few numbers, why are we doing this? Because we are crazy! Ha ha alright this is a usual question people ask why do you make us do all these things? We have a calculator we can add any numbers we want right? Why are you asking us to do all these things by using some complicated programming. Now the point is, do not add these numbers where eventually useless to us right? But to understand how python like programming language can be used to add such numbers up to whatever level right? It is just an exercise problem for you to learn the intricacies of form ok? Let’s go ahead and try to write a code for this. Answer is equal to zero. Answer is equal to answer plus one, Answer is equal to answer plus two print answers. What will be the output for this? Let me check. Initially answer will be zero and then answer will become answer plus one, we have discussed this on scratch in detail this sounds like this is the weirdest thing for a beginner programmer right? he will start wondering what do you mean by variable equals variable plus one it doesn’t make sense please note this simply means the existing answer what is the value for it ok I am adding one to it and I am adding two to it right? answer equals zero, answer equals answer plus one so answer becomes one and then answer equals answer plus two answer becomes initially it was one it becomes one plus two three so I am printing answer it will be three. A good thing to do is actually print answer in all lines if there with me is the reason teaching you people this, answer and then finally answer ok? Then run it say oh oh oh!! I should not write in quotes you see yeah otherwise it will just display answer correct we have discuss this once again so computers are dumb it will not understand what we are trying to ask them to do so initially answer is zero, answer is zero and then print answer, answer will be zero printed fine, answer equals answer plus one so answer became one and I print the answers so it became one here answer equals answer plus two, answer was one and then I add two to it so it becomes three so answer is displayed as three correct? Now let me go ahead answer equals answer plus three print answer now they should be like zero one three six this is same as adding one plus two plus three you see why? Six that’s what is happening here think think think think think think that’s the most important part here ok, so answer equals answer plus four print answer what will this be now? This will actually be lets execute and see. zero one three six and ten that’s because one plus two plus three plus four is ten, one plus two plus three is six, one plus two is three simply one then nothing zero right? if I keep doing this lets say answer equals answer plus five print answer, answer equals answer plus six print answer, answer equals answer plus seven print answer I am killing time as you can see ok that’s because many people wouldn’t know how to do these things right? Some of you are very familiar in programming some of you are taking this for the first time right? So it’s good to be slow and precise, answer plus nine print answer and finally answer equals answer plus ten and there you are when I execute
 
this, this should be equivalent to what was that, one plus two plus three correct? , one plus two plus three plus four plus five plus six plus seven plus eight plus nine plus ten that we
saw already which is fifty five let’s see if we get this number ok? Ready steady go! Let’s run this programme and see boom! Zero one three .... It is up to forty five, it is not showing me fifty five which should be the answer why is that? Can someone tell me because you are calculating answer but you are not printing it so dumb of me correct! So now let me execute it, I will get the last one to fifty five which is the sum of numbers from one two three up to ten I am not happy with this I want the sum of the first hundred numbers, how do I do this? This is where our for loop will come to our rescue let’s see how this is done. Look at this answer equals zero perfect for I in range ten answer equals answer plus I now wait very patiently let me not go up to ten let me now only go up to three and see what happens initially I take zero answer is also zero answer gets added zero plus zero is zero and then I takes one answer is zero, zero plus one is one I takes two answer is one plus two which is three so if I execute this it finally display the answer when I execute this I get three here perfect right! All of you take a pause, if you are new to programming this is the place where you should understand these four lines properly, properly ok, I repeat when you execute this, answer gets incremented one by one zero one and two gets added to answer. Right! if I makes this five you see what will happen, answer will be zero and then zero plus one, zero plus two, zero plus three, zero plus four so on and so for I mean zero plus one is one and then it will be one plus two is three, three plus three will be six, six plus four will be ten right? it is going to be the sum of zero plus one plus two plus three plus four because range of five means zero one two three four lot of details learning is always about braking the details in to small chunks and then observing very carefully right? so let me execute this I get ten perfect. It’s for you now to neatly understand what is happening here ok pause the video right now, understand and then come back.
LOOPS: SUM OF NUMBERS (CONTINUED)
I am sure you are back; you know understand what exactly this code is doing. Let me now give you a mind teaser and then let me indent this. I repeat indent this, initially it was here correct? Now if I do it like this what will happen? U know what will happen. This will now be part of the for loop, it will increment answer by I and then it will print the answer right? Look at this yea zero one three six ten see its printing zero, zero plus one, zero plus one plus two, zero plus one plus two plus three, zero plus one plus two plus three plus four and it so on now magic let me now give more details here print first I numbers when added gives, when added gives answer what does this do now? What will this do now? Anyone? Look at this. Ok let me zoom down so that you can see the entire line so answer equal zero for I in range five answer equals answer plus I print first whatever is in quotes will be just printed like that. I the value of I will be printed, I numbers when added gives the answer let me run this. First zero numbers will added give zero
LOOPS: MULTIPLICATION TABLES
Alright, so let us do one more exercise from python for loops. I am now going to display the tables ok? So initially, I will say‘t’ equals input what tables would you like to display? And I will take the input that will be ‘t’ and as and always you know I will say ‘t’ equals int of t so that it becomes a number otherwise you know we have seen this already it becomes difficult to handle, it becomes characters, strings otherwise ok? So now print‘t’ simply just like that let’s see what happens here so that we know ‘w’ are going in a right way. I input ten here and it says ten but what I want is the ten tables here you see, how do I do that? Print‘t’ comma and then there must be a multiplication symbol one comma and then is equal to and then the answer t into one right? What’s happening here? Observe, let me run this and see. What tables would you like to display? Ten tables. So ten one times is ten is displaying right? So let me display ten two times is equal to t times two whatever the t is, see what tables would you like to display? Ten ones are ten, ten twos are twenty so again let me run instead of ten if I type eight it will display eight ones are eight, eight twos are sixteen correct? Let me go up to some let say, one more so how do I do that? Print let me go to three x three comma equals comma t times three execute this, this time let me display ten itself, ten ones are ten, ten twos are twenty, ten threes are thirty remember your tables right? now I want this to be displayed ten times as you know for that I may have to use a formula ok, for see how I am going to use it, for I in range ten print ‘t’ comma x and then here one two three is given right, I want that to be I here as I varies from zero to ten I comma equals t times i, see the point is you see a pattern here the pattern is one two three that pattern is replaced by this formula so how do we do that? We do that by replacing this pattern by of for loop here ok? Alright so let me now bring these things ok so let’s see what happens? I run the file it is showing me some error that’s because I haven’t put a comma here let me put a comma here ok, again run what table do you like to display? Ten tables perfect! It starts from zero you see, that because for loops starts from zero. Ten zeros zero, ten one times is ten, ten two times it goes up to nine that’s because, I in range ten means from zero to nine, if you make this eleven and then run ten here and then you will see it goes up to hundred right? Isn’t that fun? You can now display any tables let me now display two tables perfect three tables perfect, perfect perfect! Four. Perfect that was all tables from two to ten right? So this is the power of programming where you need not necessarily display tables from one to ten rather zero to ten you can go on up to any number you want by specifying it here. You have now learnt everything of for loop almost, this much is enough for you to start using for loop, very good.
INTRODUCTION TO WHILE LOOP
I am now going to give you all a scenario where while loops are seemingly important. Assume I am a doctor I have my own clinic, I must treat my patients and assume I am a popular doctor there are a lot of patients and what I do is, I give them the token number, my receptionist gives them with the token numbers. I start with one two three four five and I go on like this and I treat my patients one after the other. How can I write a program for this? I will now write a program for this and put a monitor outside my clinic though which is in the reception area where people can see which token number is being called right now and that concerned person come inside. Let us see how we can achieve this using a while loop. Ok now look at this I will first write the code and then let us understand what this code does? While c is equal to one print token number n may please come in ok? Perfect. What will this n be? It should be a number starting from one and then it should become two it should become three and so on, so it should first be assign one ok, what is c? I will tell you in a minute let me assign ‘c’ to be one so now what I will do is, simply I will say input ‘c’ equals input continue question mark zero score one what do I mean by this? See you know what happens here? ‘C’ is a number basically ok so I will say int ‘c’, ok ‘c’ is a number. When ‘c’ is zero it will come here and it will see while ‘c’ equals one when ‘c’ is zero, ‘c’ is not equal to one so it will not pass this loop, it will not come down, it will not execute this but when c is one it will execute this now you have practised this enough right now given that I have asked you to practice it, you know what while loop is? While loop simply keep executing whatever is below while loop, whatever is below while loop, while loop keeps executing this until, until this becomes false, I repeat repeat repeat when the condition given here is true where? Whatever is inside this bracket after while when the condition is true it will keep executing this, it will keep executing until this becomes false but the moment this becomes false it will come out of it ok? It’s like a bomb detonator right? so it will keep executing this keep executing this until this goes false, once this goes false boom it comes out, ok. Let me type here print thank you thank you this is the end of our day rather today ok? Before anything I will say print hello everyone we are starting, now let’s see what happens to this. As I execute this the first line will get executed ok, hello everyone, we are starting, hello everyone we are starting ‘n’ becomes one, ‘c’ becomes one, while ‘c’ is one, absolutely ‘c’ is indeed one so you come inside print token number ‘n’ may please come in, token number one may please come in. Continue continue zero or one if you say one here ‘c’ will be taken as one but then you see the input always gives c as the string you see we have discussed this many times right? So I make it a number ok? For some time you please ignore this command you just by ignore I mean just write it know that you have to write it. With time you will understand what that is? Right! the one big mistake that people do especially teachers teach everything about programming in one shot it doesn’t work you have to have this Mac to ignore a few details and grasp only the most important things with time. These details will become easy on your minds provided you keep looking at it again and again right? so don’t worry much about this we will revisit this sometime later ok, actually we have discussed this already but don’t worry much about it, it is to convert entity c on to an integer ok fine now I
 
come here and I again go here and then see continues ok? Continue one ok enter, oh oh! It is saying token number one may please come in. This should not be the case; it should say token number two may please come in correct? So what should I do? I should ensure that I increment ‘c’ by one ok, increment not ‘c’ I meant I am very sorry I must increment n by one why? So that next time when it comes it says token number two may please come in so let me come here exit this by pressing zero see it exists, In a moment it will be cleat to you, you may again execute this print hello we are starting hello everyone we are starting, token number one may please come in continue zero or one this is for me ok? If I say one by one I mean the one here is the token number one, the one here is a command to my programme to continue or not ok? when I say one it says token number two may please come in, so what I will do as a doctor I will treat my patient once that patient is done he walks out for the next patient I will say I will enter one here enter, token number three may please come in my next patient comes I treat this little kid and I say bye to the kid and the kid goes out and then I again press one as a doctor it says token number four may please come in, the next person comes in, I treat that patient and then I keep doing this, keep doing this, keep doing this so, I am a very hard working medical practicener so I treat some twenty patients or even more I go on I go on I go on you see and finally I arrive at let say thirty six patients and everybody is done. What do I do now? Continue zero or one right? It says continue zero or one I say I am done. Let me press zero enter it comes out .Thank you this is the end of the day, why does it day that? Because when you press zero c becomes equal to this right? And ‘c’ becomes equal to zero and when c is not one if it’s only one it enters when it is not one it will come out, once it comes out it will say thank you, this is the end of our day. And that’s what happened here, as and always I repeat and I will repeat this many times handover the key idea about leaning a programming language, when it comes to a programming language the key idea is repeatedly do the same programme a few times, delete this programme and re do it again delete it and again re do it keep doing this until you are very familiar with what is happening where and then take up more challenges on the same topic and then write your code and there you are, you would become a expert in no time. Right? Take this tip very seriously now close this screen and you try writing this programme all by yourself. How would you make this counter increment and then stop when you ask it to stop by pressing zero ok? Perfect! See you all.

 

 